
@001 Tryon, Valerie\Valerie Tryon began her career as a concert pianist when she was still a child. By the age of twelve, she had broadcast for the BBC and was appearing regularly on the concert platform. Her scholarship study at Londonis Royal Academy of Music led to an award for further study with Jacques Fvrier in Paris. Critical acclaim for her Cheltenham Festival recital launched her adult concert career. Her repertoire, ranging from Bach to contemporary composers, includes fifty concertos. She has frequently performed with the foremost orchestras of Britain, as well as Canadian orchestras such as the Toronto Symphony, the Hamilton Philharmonic and Symphony Nova Scotia. Her concerto performances have seen collaborations with many great conductors including Sir Colin Davis, Sir Adrian Boult, Charles Dutoit, Pierre Monteux and Simon Streatfield. Ms. Tryon broadcasts frequently for the BBC and for Canadian and American networks and stations as well. She is a Canadian Juno Award winning recording artist. Her solo recordings have appeared on Omnibus, Pye, Argo, Lyrita and CBC labels. Currently, she is joining other world-class pianists in the recording of the complete works of Liszt for Naxos. She is a fellow of the Royal Academy of Music, holds the Harriet Cohen Award for Service to Music (1967). She also was the recipient of the Dove Prize in 1955 (presented by Vaughan Williams) and the Franz Liszt Medal in 1986 (awarded by the Hungarian Ministry of Culture). She is an Artist-in-Residence at McMaster University.

@002 Albéniz, I.\Isaac Albéniz (1860-1909) was a Spanish composer and piano virtuoso known as one of Spain's most important musical figures, and vital in creating a national idiom and indigenous school of piano music. Albéniz gave one of his first performances at age four and so startled the audience with his brilliance that some kind of trickery was suspected. At age thirteen, he left home, traveling to far away places such as South America, Cuba and the United States, occasionally stowing away. He managed to support himself by giving concerts. His travels eventually brought him back to Europe where in 1880 he had the opportunity to study and learn from Franz Liszt. In 1883, he settled in Barcelona, married and subsequently had three children. Ten years later, he moved to Paris and was influenced by French composers Paul Dukas and Vincent d'Indy. His most important work is considered to be Iberia, a set of twelve piano pieces inspired by the music and dance rhythms of Spain. He also composed several operas, most notably Pepita Jimenez. After his death from Bright's Disease, the French government awarded Albéniz the Grand Cross of the Legion d'honneur.

@003 Arensky,A.\Anton Stepanovich Arensky (1861-1906) was a Russian composer, pianist and conductor. His father, a doctor, was a keen cellist, and his mother was an excellent pianist who gave him his first music lessons. By age nine, he had already composed songs and piano pieces. After the family moved to St. Petersburg, Arensky studied composition with Rimsky-Korsakov at the St. Petersburg Conservatory, graduating with a gold medal in 1882. He then baceme a harmony and counterpoint professor at the Moscow Conservatory where his students included Rachmaninov, Skryabin and Glière. His most famous composition is the brilliant, fluently melodic and technically challenging Piano Trio No. 1 in D. Arensky was also a successful concert pianist and conductor. However, drinking and gambling eventually lead to his downfall. His health failed and he died of tuberculosis.

@004 Bach, J.S.\Johann Sebastian Bach (1685-1750), one of the giants of the Baroque age, was born in Eisenach, Germany to a family which produced no less than sixty professional musicians in seven generations. He began his professional career in 1700 when he became a chorister at the Church of St. Michael at Lüneburg. In 1703, he was hired by Prince Johann Ernst of Weimar to be a violinist in the court orchestra. However, he moved to Arnstadt later that year to became church organist. In 1705, Bach secured a leave of absence to study with Swedish organist Dietrich Buxtehude in Lübeck. Buxtehude's organ music became one of Bach's greatest influences. After marrying his second cousin Maria Barbara Bach in 1707, Bach went to Mülhausen to be organist at the the church of St. Blasius. He returned to Weimar the next year and took up employment in the court of Duke Wilhelm Ernst as an organist and violinist. By 1714, he was concertmaster of the court orchestra. In 1717, Bach moved to Anhalt-Köthen where he was appointed chapelmaster and director of chamber music for the court of Prince Leopold. This appointment gave Bach the opportunity to write secular works for ensembles and solo instruments. During his six year employment under Prince Leopold, he also wrote books to teach his wife and children the clavier. In 1720, Maria Barbara died and the following year, he married a young singer named Anna Magdalena Wilcke. In 1723, he received his last posting, in Leipzig as musical director and choirmaster of St. Thomas' church. Bach died in 1750. His music is typified by its technical facility as well as its expressiveness. Although his work constitutes the ultimate use of counterpoint and contains some of the most intricate harmonies found in Baroque music, it never sounds mechanical - in fact, it conveys the humanity of a truly great composer.

@005 Balakirev, M.\Mily Balakirev (1837-1910) was a leading Russian nationalist composer known for setting the course for Russian lyrical song during the second half of the 19th century. Balakirev received his first musical training from his mother and proved to be a precocious student, being able to reproduce tunes at the piano by age four. By age fourteen, he was made conductor of an orchestra of the nobleman Alexander Oulibishev who became his patron. When Balakirev moved to St. Petersburg in 1855, he was encouraged by Mikhail Glinka. He later formed a famous group of musicians known as the Five which included Alexander Borodin, César Cui, Modest Mussorgsky and Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. He was also one of the founders of the Free Music School in St. Petersburg and was director of the Court Chapel. Balakirev wrote many works based on Russian folk themes and collected and arranged many Russian folk songs. Among his most famous works is the incredibly difficult piano fantasy Islamey, the overture Russia and the symphonic poem Tamara. Unfortunately, Balakirev's life was troubled by fits of depression, extreme poverty, encephalitis, headaches and constant disorders of the stomach and nerves. Known to be a strong advocate for musical nationalism, and having a somewhat fierce and tactless character, he gained many enemies, particularly in German academic circles. Eventually, he received a triumph in 1867 when he succeeded Anton Rubinstein as the conductor of the Russian Musical Society symphony concerts and director of the Free School.

@006 Bartók, B.\Hungarian composer Béla Bartók (1881-1945) was one of this century's greatest and most influential composers. His father was a school headmaster. His mother, a fine pianist, was his first piano teacher. In 1894, Bartók began lessons with Laszlo Erkel and also harmony with Anton Hyrtl. In 1899, he became a student at the Royal Academy of Music in Budapest, graduating in 1903. Although his earliest compositions show the influence of 19th century composers such as Liszt and Brahms, Bartók's greatest contribution to 20th century music grew out of his interest in his native folk music. As a young man, he joined with composer Zoltán Kodály to travel throughout his native Hungary. With the aid of a primitive recording device, they gathered a comprehensive collection of authentic folk melody. The essence of these melodies, combined with a complete arsenal of modern composing techniques, became the kernel of Bartók's and Kodály's music. Bartók never adopted the twelve-tone method of composition which was becoming increasingly popular. His music remained essentially tonal, although thoroughly modern. In 1907, he became a piano professor at the Budapest Royal Academy. In 1913, his interest in folk song research took him on a tour through North Africa. Bartók was also a brilliant pianist, although he mainly played his own compositions. His second wife, Ditaa Pásztory, was also a concert pianist. She and Bartók gave concerts together performing works for two pianos. In the winter of 1927-28, Bartók did a concert tour of the United States and then the Soviet Union in 1929. He resigned from the Budapest Royal Academy in 1934. In 1940, with the onset of the Second World War, Bartók decided to move to the United States. His most popular orchestral work, the Concerto for Orchestra, was commissioned by the conductor Koussevitzky for the Boston Symphony. It was composed just before his death in New York. His last composition was the Third Piano Concerto. Bartók managed to complete it except for the last 17 bars. His student Tibor Serly arranged and orchestrated the final bars.

@007 Beethoven, L.\Ludwig van Beethoven was born in the Austrian city of Bonn in 1770. He was surrounded at an early age by music, as both his father and grandfather were local musicians. However, he soon found that Bonn was too small a pond for a great musician like himself. At age twenty-two, Beethoven moved to Vienna, the European centre for music. He put himself under the tutelage of several prominent teachers, including the famous Haydn and the infamous Salieri. He also hoped to create a name for himself as both a concert pianist and composer. He quickly gained the success that he sought in locating the aristocratic patrons who would support his musical career. It should be noted that Beethoven was the first prominent composer to succeed as a freelance composer. Beethoven's career seemed threatened in 1799, however, when he discovered that he was going deaf and contemplated suicide. By 1802, he had accepted his growing deafness but was not defeated by it. In fact, he was quoted as saying, "I will seize fate by the throat; it shall never overcome me!" With the fervor that is so evident in his compositions, Beethoven gave up his promising career as a concert pianist and threw himself into composition. Beethoven was a prolific composer. He wrote 32 piano sonatas, including the famous Moonlight and powerful Pathétique. He also wrote 18 string quartets and 9 symphonies. Few music lovers can forget the four immortal opening notes of Fifth Symphony. When asked about the inspiration for these powerful chords, Beethoven described them as, "How destiny knocks on the door." Beethoven's deafness became complete in 1819, but instead of slowing the great composer, it seemed to aid his creative powers, developing, perhaps inspiring his style. About his deafness, he once confidently declared, "You will see me again, when I am really great; not only greater as an artist but as a man you will find me better, more perfect." Often his anger expressed itself in the form of pulsating rhythms and powerful themes. At other times, his passionate humanity was embodied in his flowing melodies. Beethoven enjoyed popularity in his own day, an unusual luxury for those composers who we later come to know as "great." The day of his death in 1827 was so tumultuous that schools were closed and the military was called out to control the bereaved Austrian public. The Austrian people realized that they had lost one of the greatest musicians of all time. Fortunately, the legacy of his life's work remains behind as a reminder of this revolutionary composer.

@008 Boccherini, L.\A contemporary of Luigi Boccherini once said, "If God chose to speak to man, he would employ the music of Haydn; but if he desired to hear an earthly musician, he would select Boccherini." Boccherini was an Italian cellist and composer of the 18th Century. He was born in Lucca in 1743. He first studied music with his father, a double bass player, before being sent to continue his education in Rome in 1757. He returned to Lucca in 1761 to play cello for the local orchestra, then toured Austria and France with the violinist Manfredi. Boccherini finally settled in Madrid in 1769 where he served the Infante Don Luis (who died in 1785). He was appointed the Court Composer for Frederick William II of Prussia in 1787 and kept that job until the King's death in 1797. Boccherini's fortunes dissipated from this point until he himself died in 1805.

@009 Brahms, J.\Johannes Brahms was born in the German town of Hamburg in 1833. As the son of a double bassist, he began studying music at an early age, soon proving himself to be an excellent student of the pianoforte. At age eleven, Brahms began to compose, playing his pieces in sailors' taverns and saloons to earn money for the family. In 1853, he toured with the famous Hungarian violinist Eduard Remenyi (Hoffman) who introduced him to Gypsy music; the music of the Gypsies was to become one of Brahms' major influences. On this tour, he also met Liszt, Schumann, Joachim and other artistic luminaries of his time. In 1862, Brahms visited Vienna which he chose to make his permanent home. By 1864, he had devoted himself to composition and the performance of his own works. During this period, Brahms established his success as a composer, his works garnering international success. He earned a Ph.D. in music from Breslau in 1879. He had also been offered a Mus.D. from Cambridge in 1877, but refused it because he did not wish to travel there in person to receive it. In 1896, he began to suffer from cancer of the liver, to which he succumbed the following year. The music of Brahms successfully merges Classicism and German Romanticism. In his compositions, he sought to create works of craftsmanship and coherence, qualities which spoke of his excellent musical workmanship.

@010 Busoni, F.\Ferruccio Busoni (1866-1924) was one of the most influential musicians of his time. He was not only a great piano virtuoso, but a music theorist and prolific composer. Busoni had his first piano lessons from his mother and turned out to be a child prodigy. He gave his first public recital at only age seven and at age nine performed his own piano compositions in Vienna. Busoni studied composition with Wilhelm Meyer-Remy in Graz. In his twenties, he taught in Helsinki, Moscow and Boston before settling in Berlin in 1894. He maintained an active teaching, composing and performing career in Berlin, as well as touring internationally. Busoni was a champion of contemporary composers such as Bartòk and Schoenberg. He was also a brilliant and visionary writer on music and other subjects. His compositions included chamber music, orchestral works, opera and original works for piano (including many fine transcriptions of music by other composers such as J.S. Bach whom he greatly admired).

@011 Chabrier, E.\French composer, pianist and conductor Emmanuel Chabrier (1841-94) was largely self-taught. He actually was a civil servant until 1880. After visiting Spain, Chabrier composed the orchestral Rhapsody Espana (1883). He was a fervent admirer and promoter of Wagner.

@012 Chaminade, C.\French pianist and composer Cécile Chaminade (1857-1944) is best known for her performances of her own light salon piano pieces. At age eight, she began writing church music. She studied under Godard as well as other well-known teachers of that time. Her numerous works of all kinds attracted the attention of the public and she performed them during many concert tours in France and England. Although her music (over 200 piano works in all) has charm and clever writing, many in the music world believe that they do not rise above drawing room music quality. Her more serious musical attempts were not considered successful.

@013 Chopin, F.\According to Louis Aguittant, Frédéric Chopin was "a personal poet and singer of his race." He was no doubt one of the most revolutionary of piano composers. Many feel that Chopin's style of piano composition and playing are the apotheosis of the Romantic era. Sometimes violent and heroic, at other times melancholic and full of despair, Chopin's music has the full spectrum of human emotion. Chopin was born in Poland in 1810, at the outset of the tumultuous Romantic period. Musically inclined at an early age, he took piano lessons at age six. The prodigious boy published a polonaise the following year and by the time he was age eight, he was giving public performances. At age twelve, Chopin began taking composing lessons from Polish musician Ksawery Elsner at the Warsaw Conservatory, which further developed his already impressive talents in both composition and improvisation. In 1827, he left the Conservatory to explore the world. He performed in Vienna in 1829, then returned to Poland. After the Russians captured his homeland in 1830, Chopin chose to make his musical home in Paris, where he befriended fellow Polish nationals Franz Liszt, Vicenzo Bellini, Honore de Balzac and Heinrich Heine. He also met Aurore Dupin (Madame Dudevant), a writer whose pen name was George Sand. His relationship with her, though initially platonic, became intimate and lasted seven years. During this time he lived with her at her in Paris, at her country home in Nohant, and in Majorca, where she took him to recover from illness. Chopin was a unhealthy man, continuously enduring a wide variety of afflictions. It was John Field who aptly said of Chopin, "He was dying all his life." In January 1849, Chopin succumbed to tuberculosis of the throat. During his lifetime, Chopin wrote many works, almost exclusively for the solo piano. Among other forms, these included Mazurkas, Studies, Preludes, Nocturnes and Waltzes.

@014 Clementi, M.\Italian pianist and composer Muzio Clementi (1752-1832) was a child prodigy as an organist and composer. He went to England in 1766 and had a sensational London debut as a pianist and composer in 1770. He is credited with writing the first true piano sonatas (as distinct from harpsichord sonatas). From 1777-8, Clementi conducted Italian opera in London and in 1781, began tours of Europe where he challenged other pianists (including Mozart) in public contests of improvisation, sight reading and other performing skills. He returned to London in 1810 and began to produce a wealth of compositions including his legendary collection of piano studies. His students included John Field and Ignaz Moscheles. Clementi also went into the piano-making business, becoming a partner in London's Clementi and Co. (which became Collard and Collard in 1832)

@015 Dalayrac, N.\French composer Nicolas Dalayrac (1753-1809) had his early schooling in Toulouse, return to his home town of Muret in 1767 to study law. He played the violin in a local band. He studied harmony with François Langlé in Versailles and also from Grétry. In 1781, he composed six string quartets and in 1782, his first theatre work L'Eclipse totale, a one-act comedy, was premiered in Paris. He composed over 56 operas. During the French Revolution, he wrote patriotic songs for special occasions and later enjoyed Napoleon's favor. His operas were popular not only in France but also Germany, Italy and Russia.

@016 Dandrieu, J.\French composer Jean François Dandrieu (1682-1738) was an organist at Saint-Merry, Paris in 1704. He became organist of the Royal Chapel in 1721. He is known for his works for harpsichord which were written in a style similar to Couperin. His works include trio sonatas, sonatas for solo violin, organ works, airs and many short keyboard pieces.

@017 Debussy, C.\Claude Debussy (1862-1918) was one of the greatest composers of all time, but also one who knew the piano intimately. His piano music exploits the beauty and potential of the instrument in a way that only a pianist could. Indeed, Debussy's first music instruction was in the form of piano lessons from, of all people, the mother-in-law of the renowned French poet Paul Verlaine. This connection led to his entry into the Paris Conservatoire in 1873. While in his twenties, he spent two years in Rome where he met Liszt, Verdi and Boito, and heard Wagner's Lohengrin. In 1988 and 1989, he attended the Bayreuth Festival where Wagner's mammoth four opera Ring cycle is performed each year to this day. Another influence on his future style was hearing the Javanese gamelan orchestra with its assortment of gongs, chimes, marimbas and drums at the Paris Exposition of 1889. Debussy also became associated with the group of painters, writers and poets who were later to be called impressionists. In many ways, the term impressionism suited the art. In painting, the blurred images of Monet suggested the subject rather than trying to portray it realistically. In Debussy's music, there are many examples of the impressionist tendency to portray nature in an almost dream-like manner. La cathédral engloutie is a good example. It paints a picture in sound of the legendary ruins of a French cathedral now submerged beneath water, and the fleeting glimpses of its outlines as seen from the surface of the lake. Debussy's music sounds even more mysterious and exotic by his use of the whole tone scale (rather than major or minor) and chord intervals of fifths and octaves.

@018 De Falla, M.\Spanish composer Manuel de Falla (1876-1946) began piano studies with his mother and harmony with two local musicians in his home town of Cadiz, Argentina. In 1905, he won two prizes for piano and for composing his opera La Vida Breve. He lived in Paris from 1907-14, becoming friends with Debussy and Ravel, but when the First World War began, De Falla returned to Spain, settling in Madrid. When La Vida Breve was produced at Nice and Paris in 1913, his reputation as a composer grew. He moved to Granada in 1921, becoming mainly a nationalist composer although his works were performed in England, Paris and New York. He moved to South America during the Spanish Civil War.

@019 Delibes, L.\French composer Léo Delibes, (1836-91) was best known for the appealing and often witty melodies in his ballet music. He studied at the Paris Conservatory with the ballet composer Adolphe Adam and others. Delibes was successfully composing comic operas and operettas when he became second chorus master at the Paris Opera in 1865. The next year, he was commissioned to compose the ballet La Source in collaboration with Ludwig Minkus. This brought him a reputation as a an outstanding composer of dance music. Delibes had a major breakthrough in his career with his ballet Coppélia, or La fille aux yeux d'émail (the girl with the enamel eyes) which was performed at the Paris Opéra on May 2, 1870. Inspired by E.T.A. Hoffmann, it became one of the best loved classical ballets. In 1876, he produced the ballet Sylvia which also achieved lasting popularity. His ballet Sylvia, or La Nymphe de Diane, was first performed in 1876. It is tuneful and thoroughly danceable. The most famous number is this Pizzicati (Pizzicato) which is traditionally played in teasing, hesitant style which probably was not the composer's intention. The ballet was arranged for piano in 1876. An orchestral suite version was arranged in Paris in 1880. In 1881, Delibes became professor of composition at the Paris Conservatory. Serious dramatic works to follow included his masterpiece, the opera Lakme (1883) which features a memorably beautiful duet for two sopranos. He also composed sacred and secular choral music as well as songs.

@020 De Séverac, D.\A native of the South of France, (Joseph Marie) Déodat de Séverac (1873-1921) received his first piano lessons from his father, a painter and a man who loved music. He studied music at the Toulouse Conservatory. From 1896-1907, he studied at the Schola Cantorum in Paris, France. He later lived alternately in Paris and his home town of Felix-de-Caraman in Lauragais, devoting himself to composition.

@021 Dohnányi, E.\Hungarian pianist and composer Erno (Ernst von) Dohnányi (1877-1960) began his music studies with his father, an amateur cellist. He went on to study piano and theory with a private teacher. In 1894, he began studies in piano and composition at Budapest's Royal Academy of Music. In 1896, he was given the Hungarian Millennium Prize (commemorating Hungary's thousand years of existence) for his first Symphony. After graduating from the Academy in 1896, he went to Berlin for further studies in piano with Eugen d'Albert. His recital debut was in Berlin in 1897 and in 1898, he performed Beethoven's Fourth Piano Concerto in London. After successful concert tours in the United States and Europe, Dohnányi taught at Berlin's Hochschule für Musik and Budapest's Royal Academy (even serving briefly as its director). In 1919, he was appointed the chief conductor of the Budapest Philharmonic Orchestra. In 1931, he became director of Hungarian Radio. The Second World War was not kind to Dohnányi. Because of political problems, he resigned his radio post in 1941 and his post as the B.P.O. conductor in 1944. One of his two sons, Hans von Dohnányi, was executed for his role in an assassination attempt on Hitler. His other son was killed in combat. After the war, there were some questions about Dohnányi's possible Nazi connections, however, the American occupation force cleared him of blame. In 1947-8, he gave a concert tour of England. He then taught briefly in Argentina. In 1949, he moved to the U.S. and became a composer-in-residence at Florida State University. Dohnányi died in New York City.

@022 Dvorák, A.\If Antonin Dvorák's father had gotten his way, the famous Czech composer would have become a butcher. But after learning to play the violin from the village schoolmaster, Dvorák (1841-1904) had been smitten by music. He left home at age sixteen and studied music at the Prague Organ School. He managed to earn a modest living as a freelance violinist. From 1861-71, he played viola in Prague's National Theater orchestra. It wasn't until his Hymnus for Mixed Chorus and Orchestra was performed in 1873 that he received recognition as a composer. In 1875, he was given the Austrian State Prize for his Symphony in E-flat. He then devoted himself to composition, becoming the most well-known Czech composer. His music was championed by Liszt, Brahms and Von Bülow. His fame as a composer grew, many students soon came to him and he was invited to become a professor of composition at the Prague Conservatory. In 1892, he moved to New York City to become head of the National Conservatory. While in the United States, he wrote his celebrated New World Symphony (debuted by the New York Philharmonic in 1893). Dvorák returned to the Prague Conservatory in 1895, becoming artistic director in 1901. He was also the first musician to be appointed a life member of the Austrian House of Lords.

@023 Elgar, E.\Sir Edward William Elgar was born in the English town of Broadheath near Worcester on June 2, 1857. He was musically educated by his father, an organist at St. George's Roman Catholic Church in Worcester. Part of his early education included helping his father at the organ and participating in rehearsals of the Worcester Glee Club. In 1879, he went to London where he received a few violin lessons from Adolf Pollitzer. He also took up employment at the Worcester County Lunatic Asylum as bandmaster. He was appointed conductor of the Worcester Amateur Instrumental Society in 1882. He left that job in 1885 to take over from his father as organist at St. George's. He married the daughter of Sir Henry Roberts in 1889, then to London and then to Malvern which became his home for thirteen years. In 1904, he moved to Hereford, then London until his wife died in 1920 at which point he returned to Worcester. Elgar died in 1934. Although his academic musical training was far from formal, Elgar managed to establish himself as a major composer of the early 20th century. His musical technique was remarkable. His pieces were most often written in traditional Romantic style, tempered by strong formal elements. Elgar was honored on many occasions by various awards. In 1904, he was knighted. Honorary degrees in Mus.Doc were given to him by Aberdeen and Cambridge Universities in 1906 and Oxford University in 1905. Leeds gave him a LL.D in 1904. While in the United States in 1905, Elgar was awarded a D.Mus. from Yale University. The University of Western Pennsylvania (Univ. of Pittsburgh) followed suit, granting the same degree to Elgar in 1907. In 1911, he received the Order of Merit, was appointed as the Master of the King's Musick in 1924, was made K.C.V.O. in 1928 and a baronet in 1931.

@024 Fauré, G.\Gabriel-Urbain Fauré was born in Pamiers, France on May 12, 1845. He was the son of a provincial primary school inspector. At an early age, his father, who had noticed his musical talents, took him to Paris to study with Louis Niedermeyer. When Niedermeyer died in 1861, the young Fauré began composition studies with Saint-Saëns. Upon completing his lessons in 1866, Fauré travelled to Rennes where he was hired as an organist at the church of Saint-Sauveur. In 1870, Fauré returned to Paris. The Franco-Prussian war had just begun and he volunteered for service in a light infantry division. In 1896, he was given a post as chief organist at Madeleine. He was also hired by the Paris Conservatory as a professor. He became a successful teacher whose students included the famous composer Maurice Ravel. His achievements led the Conservatory to appoint him director in 1905. He held this position until 1920 when his failing health and approaching deafness forced his resignation. From 1903-21, he further occupied himself by writing musical reviews in Le Figaro. Fauré had an illustrious career. The Academie des Beaux Arts made him a member in 1909. He was also given the status of Commander of the Legion d'Honneur, in 1910. Fauré's unique style gives his art an immortal stature. Unresolved dischords and coloristic effects make his music anticipatory of the coming Impressionistic period. He died in Paris on Nov. 4, 1924.

@025 Field, J.\Irish composer John Field's claim to fame is that he invented the piano nocturne. Born in Dublin in 1782, he came from a musical family. His father was a violinist and his grandfather (who gave Field his first music lessons) was an organist. He later had piano lessons with Clementi, even working as a salesman at Clementi's London piano business. In 1802, Field accompanied Clementi to Paris and then to St. Petersburg in 1803. Field stayed there to teach and perform, giving many concert tours in Russia. From 1832-33, he gave performances throughout Europe. He became very ill while in Naples and was in hospital for nine months. Field moved to Moscow but died in 1837 of alcoholism and ill health.

@026 Franz, R.\German composer Robert Franz (1815-1892) was a contemporary of Liszt. His first musical experience was hearing his father singing Protestant chorales each evening. After the boy pleaded with his parents to have music lessons, his mother bought him an old piano and gave him some lessons. He studied with various teachers in Halle, and later was introduced  to the oratorios of Handel, Haydn and Mozart. He eventually persuaded his disapproving father to allow him to pursue a musical career. Although he assimilated the music of many composers into his style, he was most influenced by the lieder of Schumann and Schubert. Most of Franz's compositions are such art songs.

@027 Friedman, I.\Polish born Ignace Friedman (1882-1948) was one of the twentieth century's greatest pianists, giving over 3,000 concerts and recitals, and appearing with such artists as the violinist Bronislaw Huberman and the cellist Pablo Casals. Many considered his playing of Chopin's Mazurkas to be unequaled. Friedman studied music theory with Hugo Riemann in Liepzig and piano with Leschetizky in Vienna. In 1941, he moved to Sydney, Australia. Friedman composed about 100 keyboard pieces including transcriptions and arrangements of music by Bach and 18th century composers. He was also an editor of works by Liszt and Schumann, as well as an annotated edition of the complete works of Chopin for Breitkopf & Hartel.

@028 Gershwin, G.\George Gershwin (1898-1937) is an American musical legend. A talented pianist, he left school at age fifteen to become a "song plugger" in New York's Tin Pan Alley. He tamed with his brother Ira Gershwin (1896-1983) to create Of Thee I Sing (1931), the first musical comedy to win a Pulitzer Prize for drama. Ira was not a successful pianist but became famous for writing the words to most of George's songs. Gershwin's first hit song was Swanee (1919), popularized by the singer Al Jloson. He wrote songs for the George White's Scandals revues from 1920-24. He then met Paule Whiteman who commissioned him to write what was to become Rhapsody in Blue (1924) for piano and orchestra, orchestrated by Ferde Grofé and first performed in New York with Gershwin as the soloist. Walter Damrosch, conductor of the New York Symphony, asked Gershwin to compose a symphonic work. The result was another work for piano and orchestra, the Concerto in F (1925). After more studies in composition, Gershwin wrote works such as An American in Paris (1928) and Second Rhapsody (1931). With his brother, he composed hit musicals such as Lady Be Good (1924), Strike up the Band (1927) and Girl Crazy (1930). Gershwin's deep ambition was to write an American opera. The ambition became Porgy and Bess (1935), based on a book by DuBose Heyward and with lyrics by Heyward and Ira Gershwin. This was Gershwin's last major work. He was diagnosed with a brain tumor and did not survive the surgery that followed.

@029 Gilbert & Sullivan\British playwright William Schwenck Gilbert (1836-1911) met composer Arthur Seymour Sullivan (1842-1900) in 1871. The series of comic operettas they penned together - including H.M.S. Pinafore (1878), The Pirates of Penzance (1880), The Mikado and The Gondoliers (1889) - made their names household words to this day, whether it be Gilbert & Sullivan, or even simply "G & S". These operettas are known for their comic plots and characters, satirical wit and tuneful music. London's Savoy Theatre was actually built in 1881 to house the Gilbert & Sullivan productions. Gilbert had been a journalist and drama critic for various London periodicals. Sullivan was the son of a bandmaster who began his musical training as a choirboy. He later studied at the Royal Academy of Music in London as well as in Leipzig. Before meeting Gilbert, he was already a distinguished composer and conductor, producing many serious works including chamber music, operas and symphonic music. The first collaboration of Gilbert & Sullivan was Thespis, or the Gods Grown Old (1871). Trial by Jury (1875) was unusual in being a one-act operetta without spoken dialogue. Their first successful production was The Sorcerer (1877). H.M.S.  Pinafore (1878) and The Pirates of Penzance (1879) brought them the peak of their fame in England and the United States. Works to follow included Patience (1881), Iolanthe (1882), Princess Ida (1884), The Mikado (1885), Yeomen of the Guard (1888) and The Gondoliers (1889). A quarrel interrupted their collaboration from 1890-93). After they reconciled, two operettas that followed - Utopia Limited (1893) and The Grand Duke (1896) - were not so successful. Sullivan was knighted in 1883 and Gilbert in 1907. Sullivan was to compose his grand opera Ivanhoe (1891) and five more operas. Gilbert died trying to save a drowning woman.

@030 Glière, R.\Distinguished Russian composer Reinhold Glière (1875-1956) studied at the Moscow Conservatory, graduating with a gold medal in 1900. In 1905, he went to Berlin for two years before returning to Russia to teach. He was appointed a professor of composition at the Kiev Conservatory and was director from 1914-20. He then joined the faculty of the Moscow Conservatory where he remained until 1941. Glière traveled throughout European and Asiatic Russia, collecting folk melodies and conducting concerts of his own compositions.

@031 Gluck, C.W.\Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714-87) was one of opera's most influential composers. His early education was from Jesuit priests. He was later sent to Prague where he learned to sing and play the violin, cello and organ. While a court musician in Milan, he had lessons in music theory from Sammartini. In 1741, Gluck composed the opera Artaserse in the accepted Italian convention of da capo arias for single voices sung by castrati. Gluck later went to Paris, meeting Rameau and hearing his operas. He then went to London where in 1746 he was commissioned to compose an opera. London did not respond favorably to his style of opera. Gluck left London and toured Europe for three years as the conductor of an Italian opera company. In 1750, he married the Viennese heiress Marianna Pergin and became financially secure. By 1757, Gluck was famous in Vienna and was knighted by the pope. While in Vienna, Gluck had an opportunity to observe new French plays and comic operas that were in vogue. His own ballet Don Juan was a great success in 1761. Gluck broke with the traditional Italian conventions with Orpheus and Eurydice (1762). With his Alceste (1767), opera became true music drama. Iphigenia in Aulis (1774) was produced by the Paris Opera with five more to follow, including a revised Orpheus. Armide (1777) and Iphigenia in Tauris (1779) were his last two successes. Gluck stopped composing in 1779.

@032 Gounod, C.\Charles Francois Gounod (1818-93) was the composer of Faust, one of the most popular operas of all time. His father was a painter and his mother a pianist. In 1836, he entered the Paris Conservatory where he won the Prix de Rome in 1839. He then spent two and a half years in Italy, studying church music and composing a mass. From 1852-60, he was director of the choral society Orpheon for which he wrote choral music. The 1950 premiere of Faust in Paris was only moderately successful. Gounod made a number of revisions and added a ballet and ten years later, Faust was produced at the Paris Opera to enthusiastic acclaim. Other operas include Romeo et Juliette (1867) and Mireille (1864). Gounod is also famous for Ave Maria which uses Bach's Prelude No. 1 from the Well-Tempered Clavier as an accompaniment (Gounod apparently said it was prank and deplored its popularity). Also popular is the whimsical Funeral March of a Marionette. Other works include masses, oratorios, symphonies, string quartets, piano pieces and incidental music for plays.

@033 Grainger, P.\Percy Aldridge Grainger was born in Melbourne, Australia on July 8, 1882. He was an eccentric character who made many advances on contemporary music. Some of these include a pioneering quartet for electronic instruments written in 1937 and replacing the usual Italian terms used in music with plain English. Grainger also experimented with different methods of notation. His electronic quartet, for example, was written as a series of zigzags and curves. One of his greatest talents, however, was his piano playing. When he met the famous composer Grieg in 1906, Grainger impressed him with his pianistic skill. Grainger's arrangement of Grieg's Piano Concerto became very popular. By 1914, Grainger had settled in the United States. In 1928, he married Ella Viola Strom in an enormous wedding held at the Hollywood Bowl. From 1919-31, he taught music in summer seminars at the Chicago Musical College. He then chaired the music department at New York University for a year beginning in 1932. In 1935, Grainger established the Grainger Museum at the University of Melbourne. He hoped to share with the public his large collection of musical souvenirs. He also requested that his skeleton be kept there after his death. When he died in 1961, however, this particular request was denied and his body was interred in a normal fashion. Grainger's music is folk-based, though he experimented widely with "gliding" intervals and polyrhythm.

@034 Granados, E.\Enriques Granados was born in Lerida, Spain on July 27, 1867. He took his formal musical education at the Barcelona Conservatory where he won First Prize in piano in 1883. He continued his studies from 1884-87, learning composition. In 1887, Granados travelled to Paris to further his education then returned to Barcelona for his first recital in 1890. This launched his performance career. He made a living by playing private concerts and entertaining in restaurants. He wrote several operas but none of them gained him the fame that he would have liked. His most effective works were contained in a series of piano pieces called Goyescas, inspired by the paintings and etchings of Goya. Also of note were his Danzas espanolas. The music of Goyescas was later used by Granados in an opera of the same name. On March 24, 1916, while returning to Europe after the New York Metropolitan Opera premiere of Goyescas, Granados' ship was sunk by a German submarine in the English Channel. He lost his life in the attack.

@035 Grieg, E.\Edvard Hagerup Grieg was born in Bergen, Norway on June 15, 1843. He was educated in music first at home by his mother, then at the Leipzig Conservatory where he learned piano and musical theory. His music, steeped in German Romanticism, reflects this training. He was a master of miniature musical forms. His music also speaks of the emergence of Norwegian nationalism, capturing the melodic and rhythmic flavor of the proud nordic country. His nationalistic style earned him the nickname "Chopin of the North." Grieg was a Scandinavian nationalist. He, along with fellow Norwegian composer Rikard Nordraak, organized the Euterpe Society, which promoted Scandinavian music. In 1867, a year after the premature death of Nordraak (he was age twenty-three), Grieg started the Norwegian Academy of Music. In that year, he also married his cousin Nina Hagerup to whom he dedicated his ensuing works. Because of his nationalistic style, the Norwegian government granted him an annual salary of 1600 crowns to fuel his compositional efforts. His popularity throughout Europe increased, and he was admired by such greats as Brahms and Tchaikovsky. Grieg's success, however, did not affect his reclusive nature. He spent his later years in seclusion from public attention, though he continued to regularly compose music. He lived the remainder of his life in his house in Troldhaugen, near his hometown of Bergen. The day of his death, Sept. 4, 1907 was a day of national mourning in Norway and he was given a state funeral. His cremated remains rest on the side of a cliff over the fjords of Troldhaugen.

@036 Handel, G.F.\German composer George Frideric Handel (1685-1759) was one of the giants of the Baroque period. At age twelve, Handel became the assistant organist at the cathedral of Halle. The principal organist Friedrich Wilhelm Zachau (1663-1712), an excellent composer, was his teacher. He moved to Hamburg in 1703 where he played violin in the opera orchestra. Handel composed two operas, Almira (1705) and Nero (1705), for the Hamburg theater. From 1706-10, Handel lived in Italy, visiting  Florence, Venice, Rome and Naples, and composing his first two oratorios, Il trionfo del Tempo e del Disinganno (Triumph of Time and Truth) in 1707, La Resurrezione (1708) and the opera Agrippina (1709). The works show a growing mastery of Italian style. Handel returned to Germany in 1710 to became musical director to the elector of Hanover but near the end of the year, he visited England where his opera Rinaldo was performed in 1711.  Although he came back briefly to Hanover, Handel left again for London on a leave of absence and never returned. In 1714, the elector of Hanover became King George I of England. Holding no grudge, the King gave Handel special favors. The composer then made London his permanent home and became an English citizen in 1727. In England, Handel still composed music in the Italian style, and became London's leading composer and director of Italian opera. However, he adopted many characteristics of English music, particularly that of the choral tradition. Handel was musical director of the Royal Academy of Music from 1719-28 and of the so-called Second Academy from 1728-34. His operas include Giulio Cesare (1724), Tamerlano (1724), Orlando (1733), Alcina (1735) and Serse (1738). Handel is remembered today mainly for his English oratorios such as Messiah (1742) and Israel in Egypt (1738).  Based mainly on Old Testament stories, the oratorios are three-act dramatic works somewhat like operas but performed without theatrical staging. Handel's English oratorios use choruses prominently in addition to soloists. His other works include church music, secular vocal music, and instrumental music of many types.

@037 Haydn, F.\Franz Joseph Haydn was born in Rohrau, Austria on March 31, 1732. He was surrounded at an early age by music, as his family gathered on Sunday nights to sing, accompanied by his father, an amateur harpist. He received his first real education from his cousin Johann Mathias Franck who taught him reading, writing and arithmetic. In addition to the three R's, Franck instructed Haydn in instrumental playing. He practised the harpsichord in a rented attic room above the home of famous Italian librettist Pietro Metastasio. Metastasio recognized Haydn's talents and recommended that he tutor a local Spanish family. Haydn also worked as an accompanist to the students of Nicolo Porpora. In exchange for these services rendered, Porpora gave Haydn lessons in composition. In 1760, Haydn married Maria Anna Keller, which turned out to be a disaster. Haydn tried for most of his life to avoid her company and supported her by sending her money. In 1761 Haydn met Prince Paul Anton Esterhazy of Eisenstadt who, upon hearing one of Haydn's symphonies, hired him as second Kapellmeister. When the Prince died in 1762, his successor Prince Nikolaus Esterhazy hired Haydn. His new employer was very demanding, requiring two operatic and two formal performances per week. Haydn's period of employment with Prince Esterhazy was an important part of his career. During this time, he produced keyboard pieces, operas, 83 string quartets and about 80 symphonies. He also wrote pieces featuring the viola da gamba, an instrument played by the prince. An interesting anecdote concerning the prince explains the composition of one of Haydn's symphonies. Upon hearing that the Prince wished to disband his orchestra, Haydn wrote the Farewell Symphony. During the slow final movement of this symphony, the musicians would walk off the stage one by one, eventually leaving only a single violinist with the conductor. The symbolism of the piece convinced the Prince to keep his orchestra intact. Prince Nikolaus Esterhazy died in 1790. Haydn remained in the employ of the Esterhazy estate under Niklaus' son and heir Paul Anton. Though Haydn was paid an annuity of 1000 florins and retained the duties of Kapellmeister, he made his new home in Vienna. He also spent much time in London where he was admired by many musical patrons including the King of England. Haydn had many influential acquaintances in the music world. One of his closest friends while in Vienna was Mozart. Mozart and Haydn held each other in great mutual esteem. Mozart admired the elder Haydn who remarked to Mozart's father that Mozart was "the greatest composer known to me either in person or by name." Haydn also met Beethoven in 1792 and took him as a student. Prince Paul Anton died in in 1794 and was replaced by yet another Nikolaus. Nikolaus re-established the Haydn orchestra in Eisenstadt with Haydn as Kapellmeister. In 1802, illness forced Haydn to end his association with the Esterhazy family. When Haydn died in 1809, he was buried in Hundsturm Cemetery. A gruesome aside - in 1820, while his remains were being moved for reinterment in a cemetery in Eisenstadt, his skull became separated from the body. The skull was exhibited under glass in Vienna until 1954 when it was returned to Haydn's grave.

@038 Ibert, J.\Parisian-born composer Jacques Ibert (1890-1962) studied at the Paris Conservatory from 1911-14 with Fauré and Gedalge. During the First World War, he served in the French navy. After the war, Ibert returned to the Paris Conservatory to study with Paul Vidal. In 1919, he was given the Prix de Rome for his cantata La Poète et la fée. While in Rome, Ibert composed his symphonic suite Escales (Ports of Call), inspired by a cruise through the Mediterranean while in the navy. From 1937-55, he was director of the Academy of Rome. He was director of the united management of the Paris Opera and Opera-Comique from 1955-57. Ibert's music combines techniques of Impressionism and neo-Classicism. It is colorful and with a sense of humor.

@039 Ireland, J.\English composer John Ireland (1879-1962) grew up in a literary family. Both his parents were writers and they made sure he had a fine general education. In 1893, he began to study piano and composition at London's Royal College of Music. After his parents died (while he was still a student), Ireland was able to get positions as an organist in various churches. He received a Bachelor of Music (1905) and an honorary Music Doctorate (1932) from the University of Durham. He was a teacher at the Royal College of Music for many years and his students included Benjamin Britten. Although his early compositions show the influence of the German Romantic tradition, Field increasingly adopted more modern musical ideas and tried to keep the English spirit of simple melody.

@040 Joplin, S.\The ragtime music of composer Scott Joplin is often seen as the American equivalent of Mozart's Austrian minuets or Chopin's Polish mazurkas. Joplin was born in Texarkana on Nov. 24, 1868. After learning to play the piano at home, he studied with a local German musician. At age seventeen, he moved to St. Louis where he worked as a piano player. When the World's Fair was staged in Chicago in 1893, Joplin moved there, attracted by the excitement and music. In 1894, he took music at George Smith College, a segregated black school. In 1899, he composed the Maple Leaf Rag, which was to become the most famous of all piano rags. The piece was named after the Maple Leaf Hall, a local dance hall. On the proceeds from sheet music sales of the Maple Leaf Rag, Joplin was able to make a permanent home in St. Louis and write music full-time. Joplin dedicated himself to ragtime music. He began the composition of both a ragtime ballet called the Ragtime Dance, and a ragtime opera, called A Guest of Honor. He moved to New York in 1907 to continue teaching and writing. There, he made another attempt to adopt the operatic form to ragtime with his work entitled Treemonisha. Unfortunately, he did this with dubious success. Writing piano rags continued to be his mainstay. Around 1917, Joplin contracted syphillus, a condition which led to his insanity. He died in a state hospital. Joplin's most loved songs are still piano rags such as The Entertainer (1902), which was used in the 1974 movie The Sting. In 1976, Joplin became the recipient of an award for exceptional posthumous achievement from the Pulitzer Prize Committee.
@041 Ketèlbey, A.\Albert William Ketèlbey was the composer of such exotically titled pieces as In a Persian Market, and In a Monastery Garden. Of Danish origin, Ketèlbey was born in Aston, England on August 9, 1875. At age eleven, he wrote his first piano sonata, which was praised by elder composer Sir Edward Elgar. When he was age thirteen, he won a Queen Victoria scholarship at Trinity College. At age sixteen, he became organist of St. John Church at Wimbledon. He conducted a musical comedy troupe when he was age twenty, before being hired by Columbia Gramophone Co. as musical director and by Chappell's Music Publishing as music editor. Much of Ketèlbey's music was written under assorted pseudonyms. Ketèlbey died at Cowes, on the Isle of Wight, on November 26, 1959.

@042 Kreisler, F.\Austrian-born Fritz Kreisler (1875-1962) was one of the greatest violinists of the century. He began studies at the Vienna conservatory at age seven and won the gold medal at only age ten. He later went to Paris to study violin with Lambert Joseph Massart and composition with Léo Delibes. In 1888, he made his American debut in New York. From 1889-99, he withdrew from concertizing to study medicine and art, even serving in the Austrian army. Amazingly, his return to the stage after that was met with even greater acclaim than before. He toured extensively and in 1940, settled in the United States, becoming a citizen in 1940. During his concert career, he attributed many of his own compositions to different 17th and 18th century composers, claiming them to be newly discovered. He fooled and impressed both audiences and music critics of the time. Many of his charming short pieces for violin and piano have become staples of the repertory, including Liebesfreud, Liebesleid and Schön Rosmarin (Beautiful Rosemary). He also wrote two operettas and published Four Weeks in the Trenches: The War Story of a Violinist (1915).

@043 Lassen, E.\Eduard Lassen (1830-1904) was a Belgian composer of Danish origin. He studied at the Brussels Conservatory, receiving prizes for piano and composition and winning the Belgian Prix de Rome which allowed him to tour Germany and Rome and to meet Spohr and Liszt (who successfully produced his opera Le roi Edgard in Weimar, 1857). He was offered the position of music director at Weimar and in 1858 succeeded Liszt as court music director. He stayed at that post until his retirement in 1895. His solo songs and duets with piano or instrumental accompaniment exhibit a variety of styles. Many of them were translated into English and French and were quite popular at the end of the 19th century.

@044 Lecuona, E.\Cuban composer Ernesto Lecuona (1896-1963) made his fame as the leader of a dance band which toured Europe and South America. He played the piano as a child and composed his first song at age eleven. He went to the National Conservatory of Havana, graduating in 1911. Malaguena and Andalucia are among his most famous melodies.

@045 Lehár, F.\Hungarian-born composer Franz Lehar (1870-1948) achieved international fame with his operettas. He worked first as an orchestral violinist and then, as his father had before him, became a military bandmaster, working in Trieste (1896), Budapest (1898) and Vienna (1899-1902). During this time, he made some attempts at writing opera but then turned to operetta. One of his biggest successes was The Merry Widow (1905), which established him as the successor to von Suppe and Johann Strauss. Other operettas included The Count of Luxembourg (1909), Gypsy Love (1910), Paganini (1925) and The Land of Smiles (1929).

@046 Liszt, F.\Franz Liszt was born in Hungary in 1811. He first performed in public at age nine. In 1823, after briefly studying piano and composition in Vienna, Liszt moved to Paris where he hoped to be admitted to the famous Conservatoire. However, because he was a foreigner, he was refused admission. Undaunted, Liszt began private lessons and was soon performing as a professional concert pianist. For the next twenty years, he impressed audiences all over Europe with his virtuoso talents. At home in France, Liszt was influenced by the intellectuals and artists he met, such as Victor Hugo, George Sand, Frederic Chopin and Hector Berlioz. Saturated by French thinking and lifestyle, Liszt became a great libertine and freethinker, having several well-publicized affairs with socially prominent ladies. He fathered three illegitimate children with Countess Marie d'Agoult. In an attempt to escape the world's many temptations, the Romantically spirited Liszt turned to the Church. In 1879, he devoted himself to the Catholic Church, performing minor holy orders, and worked to improve church music. Liszt died in 1886. His piano music was largely inspired by literary and artistic sources. He was a musical poet. He wrote "The musician who is inspired by nature exhales in tones nature's most tender secrets without copying it. He thinks, he feels, he speaks through nature." His works were descriptively titled pieces, consisting mainly of short lyrical and sentimental songs. They tested the abilities of not only the pianist but also the keyboard itself. In his day, Liszt was known as the "legendary destroyer of pianos," pushing the limits of keyboards and keyboard technique far beyond previous boundaries. However, contemporary musicians are often critical of his work, accusing him of producing music of uneven quality and lacking in substance. Because he wrote much of his music primarily to show off his own talents, some works tend to be technically brilliant but sometimes musically weak. However, of the over 700 pieces he wrote, there are many which were far in advance of their time and show the immense artistic talent of one of the greatest Romantic pianists.

@

