
@047 MacDowell, E.\Edward Alexander MacDowell was an American composer born on December 18, 1860 in New York. In 1877, while visiting Europe with his mother, MacDowell enrolled at the Paris Conservatory under Augustin Savard. However, he withdrew from the Conservatory after only a year because of slow progress and went to Germany. There he studied with Louis Ehlert, a pupil of Mendelssohn. In 1879, he enrolled at the Hoch Conservatory in Frankfurt, a well-respected institution. At the Hoch Conservatory, Carl Heymann taught MacDowell piano and director Joachim Raff taught him composition. While studying with Heymann, MacDowell encountered the famous pianist Franz Liszt, who visited the class twice, and took the opportunity to impress Liszt with his talents. Two years later, MacDowell played his First Piano Concerto for Liszt and sent him a copy of his Modern Suite. Liszt recommended that the piece be played at a meeting of German music notables held in 1882. Liszt also helped get MacDowell's works printed by publishers Breitkopf and Hartel. MacDowell's growing stature landed him a job at the Darmstadt Conservatory. He married one of his students, Marian Nevins, in 1884. After his marriage, MacDowell suffered financial problems. He refused a job at the National Conservatory of New York and also at an American Consulate in Germany. In 1896, MacDowell was hired by Columbia University to head their newly established music department. However, he had disagreements with the school and resigned in 1904. Soon after, MacDowell's mental health began to deteriorate. On January 23, 1908, Edward Alexander MacDowell died locked in a pathetic child-like condition at the age of only forty-seven. The unused money raised for MacDowell's care was put toward the establishment of a sanctuary for American writers and composers.

@048 Mendelssohn, F.\(Jacob Ludwig) Felix Mendelssohn-Bartholdy was born in Hamburg, Germany on February 3, 1809. His early piano education was given to him by his mother who then sent him to Ludwig Berger. He also studied violin with Carl Wilhelm Henning and Euard Rietz. At an early age, Mendelssohn also displayed a talent for foreign languages and drawing with pastels. Around 1820, Mendelssohn began studies with his greatest teacher, Carl Friedrich Zelter. Zelter, who realized what enormous talent the boy had, took him to Weimar and introduced him to Goethe who was impressed by Mendelssohn's playing. Zelter also helped Mendelssohn get into the Berlin Singakademie as an alto. The Akademie even performed one Mendelssohn's works in 1819. Mendelssohn was proving himself to be a prodigious young musician. His first public performance was held in 1818 when he was age nine. He wrote an octet at age sixteen and composed an overture for the performance of A Midsummer Night's Dream when he was seventeen. The perfection of his early works remained throughout his entire career. As an adult, Mendelssohn travelled widely in Europe. He visited England on numerous occasions as well as Austria, Italy, Switzerland and his native Germany.  He was well known not only for his composition and playing but also for his conducting. He conducted the Berlin Singakademie in 1829 in a performance that revived interest in Bach's choral works. He also conducted the Lower-Rhine Music Festival in 1833 and in Cologne in 1835. He elevated the already prestigious Gewandhaus Orchestra to an all-time high when he led it in 1835. In 1837, Mendelssohn married the daughter of a French Protestant clergyman and fathered five children. In 1841, King Friedrich Wilhelm IV offered the post of Generalmusikdirektor to Mendelssohn. This job gave him responsibility over music of the court and the Cathedral.  Mendelssohn established the Conservatorium in Leipzig in 1842. The illustrious teaching staff of the institution included Mendelssohn himself, Schumann, Hauptmann, David, Becker, Plaidy and Wenzel. Sadly, Mendelssohn became sick in 1847. At only age thirty-eight, Mendelssohn died. The exact cause of his death is unknown although in his last days, he suffered severe headaches and chills.  Mendelssohn's pieces have become favorites in the hearts of those in Germany, England, America and Russia. One particularly well-known piece is the Wedding March from A Midsummer Night's Dream.

@049 Moszkowski, M.\Moritz Moszkowski (1854-1925) was a German pianist, composer and teacher. He made his first public appearance at age nineteen in Berlin. He subsequently concertized throughout Europe. From 1886, he made regular visits to London. In 1897, he settled in Paris. As a composer, he is known for well-written short and light piano pieces, many of them sentimental in mood. His Spanish Dances for 2 pianos, Op. 12, were enormously popular. Moszkowski later arranged them for solo piano and for orchestra. His fifteen etudes, Op. 72, are considered good for developing virtuoso piano technique.

@050 Mozart, W.A.\Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart is often referred to as the most brilliant composer ever known. Not only is his work highly regarded today but was admired by contemporary peers such as the Beethoven who once concisely said, "Mozart is good and admirable." The good and admirable Mozart was born in Salzburg, Austria in 1756. The Classical Period was well under way and Salzburg was quickly becoming one of the centers for the arts in Europe. Mozart was fortunate to be born into the family of one of the town's foremost music teachers, Leopold Mozart. Leopold's influence on his young son's musical development was enormous as he encouraged the eager Wolfgang to improve his already astounding talents. By age four, having already experimented on his own for about a year with tunes and chords, Mozart began his studies in earnest on the keyboard. Under Leopold's training, he learned at an incredible rate. In half an hour, Mozart was able to learn an entire minuet and trio. He also possessed an eerie sense of perfect pitch. When Mozart was age six, Leopold felt that his son and daughter (also extremely talented) were ready to be presented to the rest of the world. With this in mind, the family set out for Munich, the Bavarian capital. Upon their arrival, Wolfgang and sister Nannerl were presented to the Municher nobles who were stunned by the performances of these two tiny children. A tour of Munich which lasted nearly three weeks followed this highly successful first concert and the Mozarts' renown and popularity grew. This wildly successful tour presented the Mozarts with the key to a tour in Vienna, the musical capital of the Classical world. This tour in turn led to one in Paris and Versailles. It was in Paris, when Wolfgang was age seven, that his first published works appeared. Four sonatas for clavier and violin were printed.  By age thirteen, Mozart had written La Finta Semplis, his first opera. He was enjoying enormous popularity, swarmed by throngs of people wherever he travelled in Europe. Returning to Salzburg, Mozart took up employment as concertmaster for the Archbishop Colloredo. Unfortunately, the Archbishop was unconvinced of Mozart's genius and fired the young composer at the age twenty-one. Following his release, Mozart toured unsuccessfully through Mannheim and Paris where he endured the loss of his beloved mother. Heartbroken and jobless, he returned to Salzburg where he was forced once again to be employed by the hated Archbishop. This spell of employment was short-lived. Soon, Mozart was travelling again, this time to Vienna, where he married Constanze Weber in 1782. In 1785, Mozart began work on one of his most famous operas, The Marriage of Figaro. By 1787, Mozart was writing as if in a frenzy, churning out works, trying to keep up with the costs of his sickly wife and six children. However, his hard work paid off. He finally landed a position as the Imperial and Royal Court Composer in Vienna. Mozart soon found disappointment in his new job. The salary was insufficient to pay for his now extravagant lifestyle and the fashionable Viennese public was tiring of his concerts. He was forced to borrow money, mostly to pay for his wife's health care, and this depressed him. Despite these setbacks, Mozart was optimistic that his fortunes would change. They did change, but not for long. In 1791, his newest opera The Magic Flute premiered to rousing success. However, Mozart did not live long to enjoy this success. He was by this time quite ill, suffering from weakness and fainting frequently. On December 5, 1791, Mozart died while trying to compose the drum music for his Requiem. The joy of Mozart's music reflects the composer's own enjoyment of life and its pleasures. Even during the times of his deepest despair, he was able to fill his music with the ebulliency of his soul. In these passages, his playfulness is clearly evident. However, Mozart was also capable of stirring darker emotions. Thus while some themes bounce merrily, others are somber and pensive.  Mozart had few influences. His musical genius allowed him to be almost completely original. Despite the constant praise that was lavished upon him, however, Mozart never allowed himself to become arrogant or supercilious. He still kept himself open to new experiences, especially those of a musical nature. For instance, after hearing the music of Bach, Mozart exclaimed, "Now here's something one can learn from!" During the course of his 31 year musical career, Mozart produced over 600 works in all the popular forms of the time including concertos for piano, violin, and viola, sonatas, trios, quartets, quintets, symphonies and operas. Mozart made his music reflect the changing opinions of the time while simultaneously adding his own. If there is one artist who represents the order and sedate nature of Classical perfection while embodying the turbulent emotional appeal of the Romantic era, it is Mozart. If one artist can be called the greatest musical genius ever to grace this Earth, it is Mozart, the God of Music.

@051 Mussorgsky, M.\Modest Mussorgsky was one of the Russian Five, the group of Slavic composers seen to be the quintessence of native Russian music. The Russian Five also included Balakirev, Borodin, Cui and Rimsky-Korsakov. These composers drew their inspiration from the rich musical well of Russian folk art. Modest Petrovich Mussorgsky was born in Karevo in 1839. At age ten, he was sent St. Petersburg to prepare for military school. In 1856, after four years in military school, he joined a regiment and did not think of a musical career until he met composers Alexander Dargomizhsky and Mily Balakirev in 1857. In 1858, he resigned his commission to take up music, which he pursued unsystematically. Following the liberation of the Russian serfs in 1861, Mussorgsky became interested in their character and speech. He began several works but none of them gained much success. Many of them remained unfinished after his death in 1881 from spinal disease.

@052 Paderewski, I.\The famous Polish pianist, composer and statesman Ignancy (Jan) Paderewski (1860-1941) lived a charmed life. He began to compose at age six. He studied at the Warsaw Conservatory (1872-8) and made his first concert tour in 1877. After teaching at the Conservatory from 1878-81, he went on to Berlin and then Vienna.  He made his Paris debut in 1888. In 1890, he made his first visit to England and in 1891, debuted in New York. It was reported that during his American tour, he gave 107 concerts in 117 days, and attended 86 dinner parties. Paderewski was not only enormously talented but good looking, charming and apparently very witty. Apparently at one party, the hostess confused him with a famous polo player. He replied, "No, he is a rich soul who plays polo, and I am a poor Pole who plays solo." He composed mainly piano pieces and in the 1890s, composed six Humoresques de Concert (No. 1 of which is his famous Minuet in G). During First World War, he collected large amounts of money for the Polish Relief fund. And in 1919, Paderewski became the first president of the Polish Republic, although he retired a year later after disagreements with other politicians. In 1936, he actually appeared in a movie called Moonlight Sonata. A major contribution to piano literature was his supervision (1936-8) of the complete Chopin edition which was published in Warsaw.

@053 Poulenc, F.\Francis Poulenc was born in Paris on January 7, 1899. He took music lessons from his mother until he was age sixteen. At this point, he began to study piano with Ricardo Vines. Influenced by the eccentric modern style of Erik Satie, Poulenc joined a group of young French musicians called the Nouveaux Jeunes. The group included composers Auric, Durey, Honegger, Milhaud and Tailleferre. The French critic Henri Collet called them Le Groupe de Six, after the famous Russian Five. The name was later shortened to just Le Six. Poulenc served in the French army from 1918-21 before taking lessons from Koechlin who taught him composition. Poulenc stayed with Koechlin until 1924. In 1935, Poulenc began to work for baritone Pierre Bernac as an accompanist and wrote pieces for Bernac to sing. Poulenc also wrote ballet music. He was hired by Diaghilev to write for his Ballet Russes. Poulenc died in Paris on January 30, 1963. Poulenc's style was different than that of the rest of Le Six. While they experimented wildly with wild new rhythms and harmonies, Poulenc preferred to follow the Neo-Classicist strain. Poulenc best showed his skills when composing religious pieces as well as works for the piano and the organ.

@054 Prokofiev, S.\The great Russian composer Sergei Prokofiev was born on April 27, 1891 in Sontzovka. Like many famous composers, he took his first piano lessons from his mother and showed incredible promise at an early age. He wrote an entire piano score for his first opera, The Giant, by age nine. Two years later, in 1902, he finished an overture and three tableaux for another opera, On Desert Island. From 1904-7, he worked on yet another opera, Ondine. Upon its completion, Prokofiev went to Moscow to take lessons in compositions from Glière. While in Moscow, he wrote a Symphony in G and an opera called Feast during the Plague. Prokofiev enrolled at the St. Petersburg Conservatory at age thirteen and studied with Rimsky-Korsakov. When he graduated in 1914, his First Piano Concerto won him a grand piano, the Anton Rubinstein Prize for best pianist-composer. In 1920, Prokofiev travelled to Paris where he met Diaghilev, a producer for his ballets. He also met Koussevitzky who eventually published Prokofiev's works. Prokofiev married Lina Llubera in 1923, a soprano from Spain whose real name was Carlina Codina. However, the marriage was not successful. By 1940, Prokofiev was living with a young writer named Myra Mendelson. He was not yet divorced from his first wife but this turned out not to be a problem as she was sent to a concentration camp in 1946 for political crimes and was not released for eight years. Prokofiev died in Moscow on March 5, 1953. Prokofiev's work was progressive and modernistic in style. Some of his most popular works include an opera called Love for Three Oranges, and the children's symphonic fairy tale, Peter and the Wolf.

@055 Rachmaninov, S.\Sergei Rachmaninov, the great Russian pianist and composer, was born in Oneg, district of Novgorod, on April 1, 1873. His musical talents were discovered early, as both his grandfather and father were amateur pianists. His parents took him to St. Petersburg Conservatory in 1882 where he studied until 1885 under Demiansky. He then went to the Moscow Conservatory to study with Zverev where he remained until his graduation as a pianist in 1891. While in Moscow, he happened to meet Tchaikovsky who showed interest in the young composer's talent. At age nineteen, he wrote his famous Prelude in C-sharp minor. In 1902, Rachmaninov married his cousin Natalie Satina and they lived for several months in Switzerland. He then returned to Russia to conduct the Bolshoi Theater for the seasons of 1904-6. He moved to Dresden in 1906, working there in the winters and spending his summers in Russia. In 1909, he toured the United States for the first time. From 1910-17, he conducted the Philharmonic Society Orchestra in Moscow but left Russia after the Revolution in 1917. After the Revolution, Rachmaninov lived in Switzerland. In 1935, he moved to New York and then to Los Angeles which became his permanent home. A few weeks before his death on March 28, 1943, he became an American citizen. Rachmaninov's music was inspired by the Romantic Russian music of the 19th century. It was often melancholic, dwelling largely in minor keys, with broad, memorable melodies and resonant harmonies.

@056 Rameau, J.\Jean Philippe Rameau (1683-1764) was the most important French composer and theorist of the 18th century. His father, an organist, was his first teacher. After a brief visit to Italy at age eighteen, Rameau returned to France in 1701, settling permanently in Paris in 1722. He held a series of positions as an organist until 1714. In 1727, he met a wealthy financier, Le Riche de La Poupliniere, who became his principal benefactor. Rameau and his family even lived in La Poupliniere's town house from 1746-53. Rameau's wrote many treatises and articles on musical theory from 1722-62. He composed his most important stage works from 1733-57 including the tragic operas Hippolyte et Aricie (1733), Castor et Pollux (1737), Dardanus (1739) and Zoroastre (1749) as well as the opera-ballets Les Indes galantes (1735) and Les Fetes d'Hebe (1739). Rameau also composed three collections of harpsichord pieces, motets, cantatas and chamber music.

@057 Ravel, M.\Maurice Joseph Ravel was born in Cibourne, France on March 7, 1875. At age seven, he began studying the piano and taking lessons in harmony. He enrolled at the Paris Conservatory in 1889 where he continued to study piano. He won the first medal in 1891. He appeared for the first time as a conductor in 1899 when he led the performance of his own overture to Sheherazade, played by the Paris Societé Nationale. Ravel's compositions won him much fame in France. Critics saw him as a follower of Debussy's style because he wrote music using many of Debussy's techniques, although he anticipated many of Debussy's developments. Like Debussy, Ravel paralleled his music with poetic ideas. He also enjoyed working with Spanish motifs and old modes. Ravel lived a rather reticent lifestyle. He never married and very seldom taught. He was not a talented performer so he spent most of his time composing. When Europe exploded into war in 1914, Ravel joined the war effort in a front-line ambulance corps. He was refused by the other services because of his poor health and apparent frailty. His war career was short lived. The battle proved to be too intense for Ravel's ill-health and he was forced to enter a hospital for recuperation in 1916. After the war, Ravel travelled widely. In the 1920s, he visited Amsterdam, Italy, England, Sweden, Scotland and the United States. He was given an honorary D.Mus. at Oxford University in 1928. Sadly, Ravel's health began to fail in the 1930's. He was treated for cerebral illness and underwent a brain operation. However, he died nine days later in Paris on December 28, 1937.

@058 Rossini, G.\Gioacchino Rossini (1792-1868) was one of the greatest composers of opera in the 19th century. His mother was an opera singer. His father was a trumpeter who played in various operatic orchestras. Rossini first studied harpsichord and then voice and harmony. By age ten, he was accomplished enough as a singer and accompanist to earn money in churches and theaters. He entered the Liceo Musicale of Bologna in 1806 to study music theory and cello. In 1810, he left to begin his career as an opera composer. Rossini's first opera to be performed publicly was the one-act comedy La Cambiale di matrimonio (The Bill of Marriage), performed in Venice in 1810.  From 1811-14, Rossini produced twelve new operas in Venice, Milan, Rome and Bologna including La Pietra del paragone (The Touchstone), Tancredi and L'Italiana in Algeri (The Italian Girl in Algiers). These works established Rossini's fame throughout Europe. In 1815, he became musical director of the Teatro San Carlo and Teatro del Fondo in Naples. The next year, he composed Il Barbiere di Siviglia (The Barber of Seville). Other operas composed over the next few years were Otello, La Cenerentola (Cinderella), La Gazza ladra (The Thieving Magpie) and La Donna del lago (The Lady of the Lake). In 1824, Rossini became director of the Theatre Italien in Paris. His first two operas with French texts, Le Siege de Corinthe (The Siege of Corinth) and Moise (Moses), were based on earlier Italian works. His final opera Guillaume Tell (William Tell) is considered a landmark of Romantic opera. Although he lived for another forty years, Rossini penned no more operas - probably a combination of being both tired of composing large scale works and comfortably rich. He did compose two significant religious works, the Stabat Mater in 1842 and the Petite Messe solennelle (Short Solemn Mass) in 1864 and many piano pieces and songs under the title Peches de vieillesse (Sins of Old Age). He lived in Italy from 1837-55, then spent the rest of his life in Paris.

@059 Rubenstein, A.\Anton Rubinstein (1829-94) was one of the greatest pianists of the 19th century, often said to be second only to Liszt. He was also an exceptional composer and teacher, and an influential although somewhat controversial figure in Russian musical circles. In his early years, he was considered a child virtuoso and gave many performances in an extended tour of Europe. There he was exposed to many influential people such as Chopin, Liszt, members of the Russian Imperial Family and Queen Victoria. In 1846, he returned to Russia and the Tsars' sister-in-law, the Grand Duchess Elena Pavlovna took him under her wing. In Nice in 1856, he and the Duchess made sweeping plans to improve musical education in Russia, founding the Russian Musical Society in 1859 and the St. Petersburg Conservatory in 1862. In 1872, he toured the United States and for the next fifteen years was one of the most sought after pianists in the world. Rubinstein managed to alienate many of his Russian contemporaries such as Balakirev by publicly stating that, "...it was not possible to create nationalistic operas, and that even the greatest of Russian composers (Glinka) in his operas 'suffered disaster'." He softened his views after the liberation of the serfs several years later. Aside from his many piano works, he also left behind many illegitimate children and is alleged to have said, "...if I had to educate and provide for all my children, the fortune of two Rothchilds would scarcely suffice...." Rubinstein's most remembered piano work is frequently said to be Melody in F, Op. 3, No. 1.

@060 Saint-Saëns, C.\French composer Camille Saint-Saëns (1835-1921) was given his first music instruction by his mother. His natural musical talent showed at a very early age. He gave his first public piano recital in 1846 and excelled in all his studies at the Paris Conservatory. At age twenty, Saint-Saëns became organist at the church of the Madeleine but was already becoming famous as a composer of orchestral symphonic music. Franz Liszt took a great interest in his career and was responsible for the first performance of his opera Samson et Dalila in 1877. Saint-Saën's early symphonic music shows the influence of Mozart, Beethoven and Mendelssohn but later developed a distinctively French character with both charm, wit and technical fluency. His works include three violin concertos, five piano concertos, two cello concertos and three symphonies. He is wrote Variations on a Theme by Beethoven (1874) for two pianos, Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso (1870) for violin and orchestra, Carnival of the Animals (1886) as well as chamber music and songs.

@061 Satie, E.\Critics of Erik Satie see him as either an important trailblazer to the Impressionistic era or an eccentric amateur composer. His many compositional styles were undoubtedly influenced by his acquaintance with the artistic stars of his time, including Debussy, Cocteau and Picasso. Satie was born in Honfleur, France in 1866. He studied for a year at the Paris Conservatory and made a living playing in cafes and writing music for the songwriter Hypsa and singer Paulette Darty. He befriended Debussy in 1890 and at age 40, went to the Schola Cantorum to study under d'Indy and Roussel. Later, he established his own school of music in Arcueil where he was able to influence younger composers. Satie died in Paris in 1925.

@062 Scarlatti, D.\Italian composer Domenico Scarlatti (1685-1757) came from a large musical family being the sixth of ten children. He was an accomplished composer, keyboard teacher and performer. At age sixteen, he was appointed organist and composer of the Naples Royal Chapel of which his father Alessandro Scarlatti was maestro. By age eighteen, he was writing operas. From 1709-14, Scarlatti lived in Rome under the patronage of Maria Casimira, the Queen of Poland. He later worked for the Portuguese Embassy and then for the Julian Chapel at the Vatican in 1715. After some travel, the last years of his life were spent in Madrid where the Queen of Spain, Maria Barbara (his former student) employed him. She also generously paid his debts and provided for his impoverished family at the time of his death. Scarlatti left behind over 555 keyboard sonatas, many stage works and much church music. His music explored new musical ends, such devices as hand-crossing, rapid repetition of notes and arpeggios traversing the length of the keyboard. The most characteristic of his harmonic mannerisms was the acciaccatura (a lower auxiliary note struck together with its resolution).

@063 Schubert, F.\Franz Schubert (1797-1828) is widely regarded as one of the world's finest art songwriters and classical composers. He was the only Viennese master native to the city. Schubert was one of fourteen children born (of which only four survived infancy) into the family of a Lichtenthal music teacher's family. His childhood was immersed in music, with his father being his first teacher and young Franz composing songs and short instrumental pieces by age ten. He also excelled at singing (Vienna Court choir and Konvict choir) and playing violin. By age sixteen, he had composed his first symphony as well as many other works. At age eighteen, he composed more than one hundred songs including his masterpiece Der Erlkönig. For most of his adult life, Schubert was strongly attracted to the theater and wrote many operas which have not received lasting popularity. Tragically, Schubert's life was severely incapacitated in 1822 when he was diagnosed with syphillis. He made a partial recovery the following year and was able to complete many sonatas, his greatest string quartets, the Symphony in C major, as well as many other works before his death at age thirty-one. He was buried in the Wahring cemetery, two graves away from where Beethoven had been laid to rest twenty months earlier. The great admiration Schubert felt for Beethoven is evidenced by his remark "...but who can ever do anything after Beethoven?"

@064 Schulz-Evler, A.\Polish pianist Andrei Schulz-Evler (1952-1905) studied at the Warsaw Conservatory and later went to Berlin to study with Tausig. From 1888-1904, he was a professor of piano at the Kharkov Music School. He published 52 works for piano and voice, and for a time, his transcription of the Blue Danube Waltz was very popular with performers.

@065 Schumann, R.\ Robert Alexander Schumann was born in  Zwickau, Germany on June 8, 1810. As a child, his musical interests were nurtured by his father. He was given piano lessons at age ten from the organist of a local church. In 1828, he entered the Leipzig University as a law student but was more interested in philosophy. While in Leipzig, Schumann studied piano with Friedrich Wieck. He travelled to Heidelberg in 1829. There he began studying music in earnest. When he returned to Leipzig in 1830, he lived in the home of Wieck while he took composition lessons from Heinrich Dorn. Schumann was not entirely mentally sound. His life was filled with tragic events such as the death of his father from nervous disease, the suicide of his nineteen year old sister and the early deaths of two of his three brothers. Schumann had a fascination with poets and writers who met early and unfortunate deaths. He also suffered from what he called pervasive melancholy. Symptomatic of this popular malady were losses of consciousness, shortness of breath and inexpressible angst. In 1840, Schumann made plans to marry twenty-one year old Clara Wieck, the daughter of his mentor Friedrich Wieck. Needless to say, Friedrich didn't want his daughter to marry the unstable Schumann but a court decision allowed the pair to complete their nuptials. Despite the objections and exhortations of Schumann's new father-in-law, the marriage turned out to be very happy and successful. Altogether, Clara and Robert had seven children - three daughters and four sons. Schumann's weak mental health didn't affect his ability to produce music. He wrote many pieces for the stage including operas, as well as piano and orchestral works. His style was deeply Romantic. However, his music was not somber and dramatic like that of Beethoven but harmonious and melodious. Schumann died in Endenich on July 29, 1856. During his final days, he showed few moments of lucidity. He refused to see his wife and children. One of the only visitors he accepted was Brahms with whom he enjoyed playing piano duets. There is some contention as to the cause of Schumann's death. Modern evidence points to his symptoms as syphilitic, but the physicians of his day diagnosed his illness as either a sclerosis of the brain or dementia praecox.

@066 Scriabin, A.\Alexander Scriabin was born in Moscow on January 6, 1872. He was taught music at an early age by his aunt. When he was age twelve, he began lessons with two prominent Moscovite piano teachers, Conus and Zverev. He began  composition studies in 1885. In 1888, he enrolled at the Moscow Conservatory. He never showed much promise as a performing pianist but graduated with a gold medal nonetheless. He remained at the conservatory after his graduation to study fugue but did not meet the requirements for the course when he failed the examination. Scriabin was offered a contract by a publisher who also offered to pay for his planned European tour. Scriabin performed some of his music in Paris in 1896 before returning to Russia where he completed his Piano Concerto. In 1897, Scriabin married Vera Isakovic, a fellow musician with whom he began to give joint recitals of his works. He began to teach piano at the Moscow Conservatory in 1898 and remained part of the faculty until 1903. In 1904, Scriabin earned an annuity of 2,400 rubles from a successful Moscow merchant named Morosov. He separated from his wife in 1905 and moved in with Tatiana Schloezer, the sister of a music critic. In 1906, Scriabin appeared as a guest soloist with the Russian Symphony Society in New York. He left the United States for Paris in 1907 for fear of moral charges being brought against him and his common-law wife; he had never been legally divorced from his first wife. In 1908, Scriabin signed a five year contract with the publisher Serge Koussevitsky worth 5,000 rubles annually. He signed in 1912 with another publisher, Jurgenson, for an annual salary of 6,000 rubles. Scriabin died on April 27, 1915 in Moscow. He had developed blood poisoning from an abscess in his lip. It was once said that Scriabin's solitary genius had no predecessors and left no disciples. His incredible inventiveness in harmony remains unmatched. He had an unusual conception of tones which led to some interesting performances. For example, Scriabin saw certain keys as being associated with certain colors - C major was red, F-sharp major was bright blue. This led some performers to accompany their playing of Scriabin's works with displays of laser light.

@067 Sibelius, J.\Jean Sibelius was a composer whose family dates back to 17th century Finland. He was born in Hameelinna on December 8, 1865. He began his childhood piano studies at age nine. He also took violin lessons and was soon playing in chamber music performances. Sibelius enrolled at a University in Helsinki in 1885. He intended to study law but dropped out after only a semester of study. He registered instead at the Conservatory, where he practiced violin and composition. A string quartet that he wrote at the conservatory earned him a grant from the government which allowed him to travel for further study in Germany. He went to Berlin where Alan Becker gave him lessons in counterpoint and fugue. He also travelled to Vienna for further education. Sibelius married Aino Jarnefelt in 1892 and began teaching composition at the Helsinki Conservatory. In 1897, he was granted a 3,000 marks annuity by the Finnish Senate. He quit his job at the conservatory in 1900. In that year, he also revealed his most patriotic work, Finlandia. The piece became so identified with the Finnish nationalist movement that its performance was barred by the Czarist government. He settled in Jarvenpaa in 1904. In 1914, Sibelius travelled to the United STates where he received an honorary degree from Yale University. Just before the First World War, Sibelius arrived back in Finland. He was only seen once again in public performance on March 24, 1924 when he conducted his Symphony No. 7. He composed in seclusion but stopped altogether in 1927. Although he was willing to give interviews to interested journalists, he wouldn't answer questions about his music. However, it was his music that brought him fame and fortune. The Finnish government issued a Sibelius postage stamp, and numerous annual musical festivals were held in his name. Despite all the attention showered upon him, Sibelius preferred his privacy. He lived in seclusion at his home in Jarvenpaa until September 20, 1957 when he died at age ninety-one. Sibelius' music was the last of the 19th century's Romanticism. Although he was quite willing to listen to the contributions of the newer, more modern composers, he kept his style traditional, as he was taught by his German mentors. However, his music spoke powerfully of Finland and its folk culture. It is at once somber, tragic and powerful.

@068 Sinding, C.\Christian Sinding was born in Kongsberg, Norway on January 11, 1856. His first music lessons were from Lindeman in Norway. Sinding then went to Leipzig, Germany where he studied theory, orchestration and violin at the conservatory. Returning to Norway in 1881, Sinding had one of his works performed in Oslo. This performance earned him a gratuity which paid for his further education in Munich, Berlin and Dresden. In 1915, the Norwegian government granted him a pension of 4,000 crowns and in 1916, he was given a further gift of 30,000 crowns for his contribution to Norwegian nationalism. He taught at the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, New York for the 1921-22 season, then returned to Oslo. Sinding died in Oslo on December 3, 1941. Although celebrated by Norwegians as a great national composer, his music shows the Germanic influence of Schumann and Liszt. 

@069 Smetana, B.\Bedrich Smetana (1824-84) is regarded as the founder of Czech music. At age five, he had already played in a string quartet. He gave a piano recital at age six. And at only age eight, had already written his first composition. In 1843, he settled in Prague, taking piano lessons and working as a music teacher to an aristocratic family. After four years, he gave up the position and gave a financially disastrous concert tour. He turned to Liszt, who helped him open his own piano school in 1848. A year later, he married Katharina Kolar, also a fine pianist. His reputation as a concert performer (especially as a Chopin interpreter) grew, although his compositions were not popular at first. In 1856, he accepted a job as conductor of Sweden's Philharmonic Society of Göteborg. He was appreciated as a conductor and pianist but his wife's health suffered because of the cold climate. For her sake, he spent vacations in Prague but in 1859, she died. After Austria granted political autonomy to Bohemia in 1860, Smetana resigned as conductor of the P.S.G. and returned to Prague to help in a movement to open a new opera house. It opened in 1862 and Smetana turned his composing talents to opera. His second opera, The Bartered Bride, received enthusiastic acclaim in Bohemia and internationally. By 1874, he was totally deaf (because of venereal disease). He went on to compose a cycle of six symphonic poems, the most famous being Má Vlast (My Country). In his last years, he became insane and died in a Prague asylum. Smetana was buried as a national hero.

@070 Strauss, J.\The Strauss family is synonymous with Viennese dance music in the 19th century. Johann Strauss, Jr. (1825-99) is best remembered today for his waltzes The Beautiful Blue Danube (1867) and Tales of the Vienna Woods (1868). He became a musician against his father's wishes, secretly studying the violin with the backing of his mother. He then began serious study of composition. At age nineteen, he formed his own orchestra, playing in Viennese cafes and soon becoming more popular than his father. After his father's death in 1849, both orchestras were merged under his direction. He toured with his orchestra to enthusiastic audiences throughout Europe and even the United States. Strauss composed about 500 works including waltzes, polkas, quadrilles and marches. His operettas include Die Fledermaus (The Bat) and Der Zigeunerbaron (The Gypsy Baron).

@071 Sullivan\see Gilbert & Sullivan

@072 Tausig, C.\Polish pianist Carl Tausig (1841-71) has been described as the most perfect and highly polished pianist of his time. He began lessons with his father Aloys Tausig (1820-85), a pianist himself who composed brilliant piano music. He was later a student of Liszt and many felt that in some areas of technique, he surpassed his teacher. Tausig debuted in 1858 at an orchestral concert directed by Von Bülow in Berlin. He gave concerts throughout Germany and later Russia. He lived in Dresden and settled in Berlin in 1865 where he opened the Schule des Höheren Klavierspiels. Tausig lives on as a composer of fabulous piano transcriptions and paraphrases in the tradition of Liszt.

@073 Tchaikovsky, P.\Piotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky is perhaps the most famous Russian composer ever. He was born in Votkinsk on May 7, 1840. Having been born to a reasonably well-off family, he was given a good musical education from a French teacher. At age ten, Tchaikovsky moved with his family to St. Petersburg where he studied to become a government clerk. His musical talent, however, did not show until he attended the new school in the city founded by Anton Rubinstein. That school later was renamed the St. Petersburg Conservatory. Here, Tchaikovsky learned harmony and counterpoint as well as composition. Tchaikovsky was hired by the Moscow Conservatory in 1866 as a professor of harmony. At this point he began to compose in earnest but his first works were uninspired. It was his symphonic poem Fatum (1869), with its minor modes and rhythmic life, which finally demonstrated his promise as an individualistic composer. His subsequent works, though often criticized, went on to become enormously famous. Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No. 1 (1875) was initially called unplayable by his good friend Nicolai Rubinstein. Similar attacks were made on his Violin Concerto (1881) by Leopold Auer, to whom the score was dedicated. However, the incredible popular response to these pieces spoke for the composer's mastery. Much of Tchaikovsky's music reflects a life fraught with tragedy. His mother died of cholera when he was age fourteen. A woman with whom he considered marriage married another man in 1868. When he finally married in 1877, Tchaikovsky found that his homosexual nature was incompatible with his new wife and in a fit of despair, attempted suicide. A woman, Nadezhda von Meck, who had been supporting Tchaikovsky with an annuity of 6,000 rubles per year terminated this income and all correspondence at the peak of his career. Tchaikovsky found this particularly sad because, having corresponded with her for over thirteen years, he had considered von Meck among his best friends. It seems ironic that Tchaikovsky apparently died of the same disease that claimed his mother. While visiting St Petersburg in 1893, during the height of a cholera epidemic, Tchaikovsky ignored the warnings about drinking unboiled water. A more recent theory about his suggests that he actually committed suicide after a mock trial. He died on November 6, 1893.

@074 Verdi, G.\Giuseppe Verdi (1813-1901) was Italy's greatest composer of Romantic opera. He was the son of a poor innkeeper. His first music lessons were with an organist in the town of Busseto where he went to school. Verdi lived in Busseto in the home of a local grocer who recognized the boy's musical ability and offered to pay for studies at the Milan Conservatory (he later married the grocer's daughter). He applied to the conservatory in 1832 but was turned down because he was over the age limit and his piano playing was too weak. He took private lessons and in 1835, returned to Busseto to become a church organist. He wrote his first opera Oberta which was performed in Milan in 1839. Verdi's career was interrupted by the death of his wife and both his children from 1838-40. But in 1842, his Milan producer persuaded him to write the opera Nabucco which was to be his first great success. Verdi's work was in demand throughout Italy. He produced a series of eighteen operas culminating with Rigoletto in 1851, Il Trovatore (The Troubador) in 1853, and La Traviata (The Wrongdoer) in 1853. By the 1850s, Verdi had international fame and commissions by theaters outside Italy led to operas such as La Forza del destino (The Force of Destiny) in 1862 for Saint Petersburg, and Aida (1871) for a new opera house in Cairo. He also became involved in politics and was elected to a term in the Italian parliament in 1861. After Aida, Verdi did less composing and spent more time with his second wife, the singer Giuseppina Strepponi. He did compose his Requiem Mass in 1874, but he was mainly content to revise earlier operas. His publisher Ricordi and librettist Arrigo Boito managed to persuade him to write Otello (1887) and Falstaff (1893). Verdi joined Rossini and Puccini to give Italy a golden age of opera.

@075 Villa-Lobos, H.\Brazilian composer Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887-1959) first studied music with his father, a writer and amateur cellist. After his father died in 1899, he earned a living by playing cello in cafes and restaurants. In 1905, he traveled to northern Brazil to collect authentic folk songs. In 1907, he entered the National Institute of Music in Rio de Janeiro. In 1912, he went on an expedition into Brazil's interior where he gathered a wide variety of Indian songs. A concert in Rio de Janeiro in 1915 presented his compositions and caused a sensation. People loved the exuberance and originality of his music. In 1923, he went to Paris on a Brazilian government grant. When he returned to Brazil in 1930, Villa-Lobos became director of music education in Rio de Janeiro and introduced bold innovations which emphasized Brazil's cultural resources. In 1944, he made his first American tour, conducting his works in Los Angeles, Boston and New York. In 1945, he established the Brazilian Academy of Music in Rio de Janeiro. He visited the United States again in 1947 and Europe in 1949 but never moved from his home town of Rio de Janeiro.

@076 Von Weber, C.M.\Carl Maria von Weber (1786-1826) is considered the founder of the German Romantic school of composition. His father was an army officer who was also a fine amateur violinist. He wanted his son to become a musician. Constanze Weber, Von Weber's niece, was married to Mozart (certainly a hard act to follow). His mother was a singer, although she died when Von Weber was age twelve. His first formal teacher was his stepbrother Fritz, a pupil of Haydn. In 1796, he took piano lessons from J.P. Heuschkel at Hildburghausen. In 1797, he had counterpoint lessons from Michael Haydn in Salzburg. By 1800, he had already composed piano pieces, an opera and a mass. He went to Vienna in 1803 as a student of Vogler, who helped him get a job as Kapellmeister at Breslau Municipal Theater (1804-6). He was director of the Prague Opera from 1813-16 and became Court Kappellmeister of Dresden in 1817. After many difficulties, his most famous opera Der Freischütz was produced to great acclaim in Berlin in 1821. By 1824, he was ill with tuberculosis. When he died, Richard Wagner not only gave the funeral oration but composed and conducted music for the occasion.

@077 Wagner, R.\Richard Wagner (1813-83) is not only the greatest creator of German opera but one of the most influential composers of the 19th century. Wagner became interested in theater at an early age. In 1828, he wrote Leubald und Adelaide, a spoken tragedy heavily influenced by Shakespeare and Goethe. He decided then that he needed to write music, and began to teach himself composition and to study scores. His only formal training was in 1831-32 with the Leipzig cantor C.T. Weinlig. Wagner was a conductor with various small theater companies in the 1830s. He also wrote two operas, Die Feen (The Fairies) in 1834 and Das Liebesverbot (Forbidden Love;  after Shakespeare's Measure for Measure) in 1836. His next opera Rienzi was much larger. It was successfully performed in Dresden in 1842. After the production of Der fliegende Holländer (The Flying Dutchman) the next year, Wagner received a conducting position in Dresden where he completed Tannhäuser (1845) and Lohengrin (1848). In 1849, Wagner fled to Switzerland after taking part in revolutionary political activities. His exile from Germany lasted until 1860. He spent the next few years writing several treatises on the future of opera and drama. From 1853-74, he composed his greatest work, Der Ring des Nibelungen (The Ring of the Nibelung), a cycle of four operas - Das Rheingold (The Rhinegold), Die Walküre (The Valkyrie), Siegfried, and Götterdämmerung (Twilight of the Gods). In the midst of creating The Ring, Wagner also composed Tristan und Isolde from 1857-59 and Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg (The Mastersingers of Nuremberg)  from 1862-67. In 1864, he was called to Munich by Ludwig II, the young "mad" king of Bavaria and an admirer of Wagner's works and theories. The king became Wagner's patron for the last 20 years of his life, guaranteeing the performance of his mature works and also making possible the construction of the famous Bayreuth theater according to Wagner's own design. Bayreuth hosted the first complete production of the Ring in 1876 (it continues to be the site of the annual Wagner festival with visitors from around the world coming to experience The Ring). Parsifal, Wagner's last opera, was performed in 1882. After Wagner's death, control of the Bayreuth festival passed to Cosima, his second wife and daughter of Liszt. The festival has been directed by a succession of Wagner's children and grandchildren to Wolfgang Wagner, the last Wagner as of this writing. Wagner sought to create a new synthesis of music, verse and staging called Gesamtkunstwerk. Wagner's verse dispensed with the end-rhyme and traditional closed musical structures. His vocal lines became open-ended, supported by the orchestral accompaniment and fluctuating with the sense of the text. A set of motifs associated with characters, things, ideas and events created unity and psychological associations. By using myths and legends for his dramatic materials, Wagner was looking for lasting symbolic value. Tristan und Isolde was one of Wagner's most influential works. The extreme chromaticism, and continuously shifting key centers led to the atonality of Arnold Schoenberg and the mainstream musical language of the twentieth century.

@078 Wallace, W.\William Wallace (1860-1940) was a Scottish composer and writer on music. He studied medicine in Glasgow, Vienna and Paris, specializing in opthamology, but from age twenty-nine concentrated on music. He studied at London's Royal Academy of Music and later taught there. His music reflects the influence of Liszt, particularly in his six symphonic poems (a form that he in Britain).
@079 Coop, Jane\ Canadian pianist Jane Coop has thrilled audiences around the world with her remarkable artistry. Her numerous recitals and orchestral appearances, impressive recordings and countless national radio broadcasts have brought her international attention from critics and music lovers alike Well known for her "virtuosic ease" and "pristine musicianship", she has built a reputation as one of Canada's leading pianists.

Coop's exceptional versatility makes her equally at ease in the recital hall and in concert with orchestra. She has toured extensively, giving performances in some of the world's most prestigious concert halls: the Weill Recital Hall and Tisch Centre for the Arts of the 92nd St. Y in New York, London's Wigmore Hall, the Kennedy Centre in Washington, Roy Thompson Hall in Toronto, St. Petersburg's Bolshoi Hall and the Hong Kong Cultural Centre. Invitations from some of the finest orchestral conductors in North America and Europe including Mario Bernardi, Kazuyoshi Akiyama, Andrew Davis, Gerard Schwartz and Rudolph Barshai, have resulted in outstanding concerto performances.

Coop has an extensive discography, with recordings on both the Skylark and CBC labels. The Sklark label has issued complete CDs of Bach, Haydn, and Beethoven. Her recordings of Mozart Piano Pieces and Piano Quartets (with the Orford String Quartet) were both nominated for Juno awards. On the CBC label, Ms. Coop has appeared both in recital and with orchestra. The phenomenally popular The Romantic Piano, a collection of works by Chopin, Liszt, Schumann and Debussy, has been the top selling solo disc on the CBC label. Classical Music Magazine called her. CBC recording of concerti by Prokofiev, Bartok and Forsyth with Mario Bernardi and the Calgary Philharmonic Orchestra "exceptionally moving".

The recently released The Romantic Piano, Vol.II (CBC MSCD 1083) has received rave reviews across the continent. In Tune Magazine said "Jane Coop presents a poised pianist, richly expressive and intellectual as well in this survey of piano music from Chopin to Debussy that is just perfect in its high musicianship."

Ms. Coop teaches at the School of Music, University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Canada, where she is Professor of piano and chamber music.
@080 George, Mark\American pianist Mark George is a leading force in Cleveland's contemporary music scene. As a core member of Epicycle: An Ensemble For New Music, he has performed over fifty premieres in the Cleveland area. An avid chamber musician and recitalist, Dr. George has performed throughout the United States, Canada and Mexico. 

His chamber ensemble, North Coast Trio, captured grand prize at the 1992 Fischoff National Chamber Music Competition, and shared first prize at the 1993 Chamber Music Yellow Springs Competition. North Coast Trio continues to tour extensively. He has devoted a number of recitals to the works of Beethoven and Chopin, winning praises for his "brilliance, vitality, and unpretentious yet dramatic style." His awards include first prize at the American Music Scholarship Association Piano Competition, finalist at the Simone Belsky Piano Competition, and the Robert Weskopf Award for excellence in piano performance at The Cleveland Institute of Music. 

Recipient of the Doctor of Musical Arts degree from The Cleveland Institute of Music and Master of Music degree from Indiana University, Dr. George is deeply interested in synthesizing many aspects of music. In addition to teaching piano and chamber music literature at Case Western Reserve University, Mark George serves as principal keyboardist with Cleveland Chamber Symphony. Dr. George recently became director of the Initiative for Cultural Arts in Education 
(ICARE), a program that connects the resources of cultural institutions with the needs of the Cleveland Public Schools in a way that places the arts at the center of the school curriculum.

@081 Gee, Ken\Canadian pianist Ken Gee has appeared frequently as a recitalist, chamber music player and accompanist.  He has also performed many concertos, including those by Bach, Mozart, Mendelssohn, Poulenc and Dubois.  In 1975, he gave the Canadian premiere of the Yellow River Piano Concerto with the McMaster Symphony (with representatives of the Chinese embassy in attendance at Mohawk College Auditorium, Hamilton).  Ken also has a special interest in the duo piano repertoire and has given duo recitals with Katherine Sametz-Jarosil and Patricia Rolston.

Ken has studied with Edna Smith, Reginald Bedford and Boris Berlin, as well as performed in masterclasses of Raymond Dudley, Janos Solyom and Karl Ulrich Schnabel.  As a student, he won performance scholarships annually from 1960 to 1973.  In 1982, he was a Provincial Scholarship Winner and National Finalist in the International Stepping Stone division of the Canadian Music Competitions held in Toronto and London, Ontario.  He holds an A.R.C.T. in piano performance and received his Honours Bachelor of Music from McMaster in 1975 where he was awarded the McMaster Medal for the Creative &Performing Arts (given each year to one graduating student in all of the Humanities).

In addition to performing and teaching music, both privately and at College and University level, Ken has been involved in arts management.  He was also for many years a freelance music critic for the Hamilton Spectator. He continues to be active accompanist and chamber music player. Ken is also the music editor of The Pianist.
@082 Silverman, Robert\One of Canada's most distinguished pianists, Robert Silverman has toured throughout North America, Europe, the Far East and Australia, performing with the Chicago Symphony, the Sydney Symphony, the BBC (London) Symphony and the St. Petersburg Philharmonic, as well as every major orchestra in Canada. Conductors with whom he has appeared include Seiji Ozawa, John Eliot Gardiner, Sergiu Comissiona, Neeme Järvi, Zdenek Macal, James Conlon, Raffi Armenian, and the late Kiril Kondrashin. Summer festivals at which he has appeared include Ravinia, Chautauqua, the Festival of the Sound, Courtenay, and the Guelph Spring Festival. Robert Silverman is heard often on the CBC, and his fifteen-plus recordings have been acclaimed by critics everywhere. His album of piano music of Franz Liszt won a Grand Prix du Disque from the Liszt Society of Budapest, while his recording of the Michael Baker Piano Concerto (written for, and dedicated to Silverman) won a JUNO award. He was recently the subject of a Stereophile cover story. Robert Silverman has been a long-time member of faculty of the University of British Columbia,  and recently completed a term as Director of the School of Music.

A native of Montreal, Robert Silverman appeared in recital at the age of five, and made his debut with the Montreal Symphony Orchestra when he was fourteen. Nevertheless, it was only after Orchestra when he was fourteen. Nevertheless, it was only after studying engineering for three years and ultimately  earning a B.A. in the humanities that he embarked upon a career as a concert pianist. Within a few months he won the Grand Prize in the Canadian Music Competition and Second Prize in the CBC Talent Competition, and was awarded a Canada Council grant for two years' study in Vienna. Upon his return from Europe, Silverman completed his formal music education at McGill University and the Eastman School of Music. During this period a string of prizes and medals in the Rio de Janeiro, Van Cliburn, Busoni, and Viana da Motta International Piano Competitions culminated in 1967 with the Grand Prize in the prestigious Concours Jeunesses Musicales. Shortly thereafter he made his highly-acclaimed American debut in Washington, D.C. Since then Robert Silverman has amassed an enviable collection of accolades from all over the world: London, New York, Sydney, Toronto, Budapest, Kiev, Hong Kong. In 1996 his concertizing has taken him to England and Ireland, as well as to Romania, where he performed with the Bucharest Philharmonic Orchestra.

In a world that sees wunderkinds of the keyboard come and go, Robert Silverman -- at the peak of his powers -- has achieved a position of musical and technical authority that can only come after years of deep commitment to one's instrument and its vast repertoire. Many aspects of Silverman's playing are frequently commented upon: his polished, flawless technique, the amazing range of his tonal palette which never sounds hard or muddy, his uncanny ability to sing his way into the heart of a phrase, and his probing interpretation of the most complex works in the repertoire. But perhaps what comes across most clearly is that he enjoys performing; and just as clearly, that audiences enjoy Robert Silverman.
@

