@416 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The Etude in B minor, Op. 25, No. 10 is an octave study which challenges the endurance and power of a pianist by its fierceness. The beautifully lyrical middle section provides both a refreshing musical break for the listener, as well as chance for the performer's muscles to recover!

@417 Hungarian composer Franz Lehár (1870-1948) produced his most famous operetta Die lustige Witwe (The Merry Widow) in Vienna, 1905. Based on text adapted from a comedy by Meilhac called L'Attaché by Viktor Léon and Leo Stein, the complicated but light-hearted plot finds Baron Mirko Zeta's attempting to get the Merry Widow Hanna Glawari to marry his young partner Danilo. The Merry Widow is very wealthy and the Baron would like some of that money for his impoverished country Pontevedria. It is very silly, however, the music (selections heard here) is delightful - especially the famous Merry Widow waltz.

@418 Eduard Lassen (1830-1904) was a Danish-born Belgian composer who succeeded Liszt as music director at the Weimar Court in 1858. He is mainly remembered for his operas Le roi Edgard (1855) and Der Gefangene (1865) but composed many solo songs with piano or instrumental accompaniment, such as Ich weil in tiefer Einsamkiet (No. 1 from 2 Lieder). This is a rare performance of the transcription of the song by Franz Liszt (1811-86). It is based on a copy of the out-of-print score located in the Liszt Museum in Weimar.

@419 Eduard Lassen (1830-1904) was a Danish-born Belgian composer who succeeded Liszt as music director at the Weimar Court in 1858. He is mainly remembered for his operas Le roi Edgard (1855) and Der Gefangene (1865) but composed many solo songs with piano or instrumental accompaniment, such as Lösse, Himmel, meine Seele (Redeem my soul, O heaven), No. 2 from 2 Lieder. This is a rare performance of the transcription of the song by Franz Liszt (1811-86). It is based on a copy of the out-of-print score located in the Liszt Museum in Weimar. Liszt adds interesting harmonies and unusual use of piano registers to the music.

@420 The melody for God Save the Queen (King) has been used by some 20 countries as an official national song, although it seems to have first become popular in Britain after being introduced in London in 1745. In the United States, they presently know the anthem as America, with the words "My Country, 'Tis of Thee". God Save the Queen (paraphrase de concert). Franz Liszt's elaborate "paraphrase de concert" on God Save the Queen appeared in 1841 alongside a similar version of La Marseillaise (included in The Pianist). Liszt (1811-1886) wrote almost 400 piano transcriptions, arrangements, fantasies, paraphrases, variations, reminiscences, etc. They were a way of bringing infrequently performed orchestral works and the music of composers that Liszt was championing to the public. They also were vehicles for Liszt's piano virtuosity. Liszt's paraphrases were freely composed works based usually on operatic melodies.

@421 The Requiem is the Roman Catholic Mass for the Dead. Many famous composers, such as Palestrina, Berlioz, Verdi and Fauré, have made elaborate musical settings. Mozart's incomplete setting has been the focus of many stories about the "mysterious stranger" who called on the composer to commission the Requiem. As told in Peter Shaffer's famous play Amadeus (adapted for film), an ill Mozart saw this as an omen predicting his own death. The stranger actually worked for Count Franz von Walsegg, who wanted the work performed in memory of his own late wife. Mozart didn't finish the Requiem before his death in 1791. The score was completed by the composer's student Franz Xavier Süssmayr who delivered it to von Walsegg. Franz Liszt wrote this transcription of the Confutatis (From the accursed) and Lacrimosa (Lamentation) from Mozart's Requiem in 1877. As a master transcriber, Liszt (1811-86) produced piano versions of the symphonies, as well as works by many other composers, which are remarkably faithful to the originals. In concerts, Liszt often performed the transcriptions before the public had even heard the original versions.

@422 Franz Liszt (1811-86) wrote his three Mélodies hongroise (d'après Schubert) from 1838-39. This March Hongroise (Hungarian March) is the second in the set which includes an Andante and Allegretto. It opens mysteriously with pedaled trills sounding like thunder or drums in the distance. It builds slowly in intensity, finishing with thundering chords and octave melody. As a master transcriber, Liszt produced piano versions of works by many other composers which are remarkably faithful to the originals. In concerts, Liszt often performed the transcriptions before the public had even heard the original versions.

@423 In its original form, this Gavotte by German composer Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714-1787) appears in the opera Paris and Helena (Paride ed Elena, 1770), based on a story of heartbreak. Johannes Brahms transcribed and dedicated the Gavotte for his friend/pianist Clara Schumann (wife of Robert Schumann and a woman who Brahms deeply loved). It was first performed in 1856 and published in 1871. Interestingly, Brahms often uses three staves in the music to make reading the middle part easier.

@424 Maurice Ravel (1875-1937) composed his charming five movement suite Ma mère l'oye (Mother Goose) for piano duo between 1908-10. He wrote an orchestral arrangement a year later and it was produced as a ballet in Paris in 1912. Movement 1, Pavane de la Bell au bois dormant (Sleeping Beauty's Pavane) has quiet counterpoint and a cool clarity.

@425 Maurice Ravel (1875-1937) composed his charming five movement suite Ma mère l'oye (Mother Goose) for piano duo between 1908-10. He wrote an orchestral arrangement a year later and it was produced as a ballet in Paris in 1912. Movement 2, Petit Poucet (Tom Thumb), includes descriptive bird calls!

@426 Maurice Ravel (1875-1937) composed his charming five movement suite Ma mère l'oye (Mother Goose) for piano duo between 1908-10. He wrote an orchestral arrangement a year later and it was produced as a ballet in Paris in 1912. Movement 3, Laideronnette, Impératrice des Pagodes (Empress of the Pagodas) tips its hat to Debussy with imitation of Javanese gamelans, bell-like sonorities and use of the pentatonic scale.

@427 Maurice Ravel (1875-1937) composed his charming five movement suite Ma mère l'oye (Mother Goose) for piano duo between 1908-10. He wrote an orchestral arrangement a year later and it was produced as a ballet in Paris in 1912. Movement 4, Les entretienes de la Bell et de la Bête (Conversations of Beauty and the Beast), is a moderately paced waltz.

@428 Maurice Ravel (1875-1937) composed his charming five movement suite Ma mère l'oye (Mother Goose) for piano duo between 1908-10. He wrote an orchestral arrangement a year later and it was produced as a ballet in Paris in 1912. Movement 5, Le jardin féerique (The Fairy Garden) is a beautiful, slow sarabande.

@429 Edward Elgar (1857-1934) is considered England's greatest Romantic composer. His popular Salut d'amour first appeared for piano solo in 1888, and was arranged for orchestra the following year. It is often heard today in a violin and piano arrangement. The work is graceful and fluent with lovely sentimentality, typical of the "romance" pieces of the time. It is also easy to play, and that may be a reason for its popularity.

@430 Turkey in the Straw (originally titled Zip Coon) was first published in 1834 as a "famous comic song, as sung by all the celebrated comic singers." The newer title Turkey in the Straw appears to have come about indirectly. In 1861, another song by Dan Bryant bearing the same title appeared, including the famous tune at the end. In 1919, this arrangement by American composer David W. Guion was published as Turkey in the Straw: Cowboys' and Old Fiddlers' Breakdown No. 1. Guion prefaced the music as follows, "Turkey in the Straw" every American, of course, knows, but not as I do, for I have danced to it thousands of times out here at the cowboy dances until I was almost ready to drop. I do not know why, where, when or by whom it was written, but the cowboys and old fiddlers rather look on it as their 'national hymn.' In this concert transcription I have tried to write it just as I have so often heard it whistled and played by our funny old fiddlers, the cow-punchers and cowboys. It is not easy–it was not meant to be, but I certainly could have made it a great deal harder to play."

@431 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The Etude in D-flat, Op. 25, No. 8 is a study in sixths which many teachers steer away from those with small hands. Von Bülow, the great 19th century German pianist, thought that it was "the most useful exercise in the whole range of the Etude literature." He even recommended warming up for a public performance by playing it six times in a row!

@432 El Amor Brujo (Love, the Magician) by Manuel de Falla (1876-1946) was first presented in Madrid in 1915. Originally it was a 'gitanería' with song, dance and spoken passages. Later it became a ballet with songs. Based on text by Martinez Sierra, the music was inspired by folk art and 'cante jondo', the primitive song of Andalusia. The Pantomime from the ballet was arranged by the composer for solo piano, along with the famous Ritual Fire Dance. De Falla is regarded as one of the great Spanish composers of all time and is also thought of as the spiritual father of contemporary Spanish music.

@433 Born in Italy but educated in Germany, Ferrucio Busoni (1866-1924) is known to have been one of the great pianistic talents of his time. Like many of history's legendary pianists, he not only possessed great keyboard skills but also significant compositional ability. His original music is rarely played today, however, some of his transcriptions of music by other composers survive both on stage and in recordings. His transcriptions of Mozart are very special. In Busoni's time, the music of Mozart was being re-discovered. Busoni had a very deep love of the music and in addition to transcriptions, composed new cadenzas for the Mozart piano concertos. This transcription of the darkly beautiful Andantino second movement of Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 9, K.271 was first published in 1914. Busoni makes some small changes and cuts to the original music, but his intent is to increase the musical tension and the transcription is very successful.

@434 La paloma (The Dove) is by Spanish composer Sebastián Yradier (1809-65). Yradier worked in Madrid, Paris (he even taught singing to Empress Eugénie) and Cuba, where he became much interested in Creole music. He also appears to have been a professor of solfège at the Madrid Conservatory for a number of years. His popular Spanish songs were very successful throughout Europe and the Americas, and were performed by famous singers of the time. In fact, Bizet innocently adapted one of Yradier's songs (El Arreglito) for the habanera in the first act of Carmen. Bizet thought it was a folksong but after learning his mistake, added an acknowledgment in the vocal score of Carmen.

@435 French composer Léo Delibes (1836-91) is known for the appealing and often witty melodies in his ballets and operas. His masterpiece is the opera Lakmé (1883) which features the memorably beautiful duet (once used as the background music for a British Airways television commercial). His ballet Sylvia, or La Nymphe de Diane, was first performed in 1876. It is tuneful and thoroughly danceable. The most famous number is this Pizzicati (Pizzicato) which is traditionally played in teasing, hesitant style which probably was not the composer's intention. The ballet was arranged for piano in 1876. An orchestral suite version was arranged in Paris in 1880.

@436 Jean Philippe Rameau was the most importan French composer and musical theorist of the 18th century. Between 1733 and 1758 he wrote a  number of tragic operas include Hyppolite et Aricie, and Castor and Pollux. This charming Musette is taken from his collection of harpsichord pieces.

@437 This is an Adagio by Italian composer and organist Giovanni Battista Grazioli (1750-1820). It is a beautiful melodic piece which calls for a singing style of piano playing, but it   is not technically difficult. 

@438 Jean Philippe Rameau was the most importan French composer and musical theorist of the 18th century. Between 1733 and 1758 he wrote a  number of tragic operas include Hyppolite et Aricie, and Castor and Pollux. Le Rappel des Oiseaux (Bird Calls) is taken from his collection of harpsichord pieces.

@439 Jean François Dandrieu (1682-1738) was one of the most celebrated French composers of harpsichord music in his time, and his Les fifres remains popular with students today. Dandrieus composition are generally in the style of Couperin, and include works for organ, harpsichord, and solo violin.

@440  This is  music from Ballet des ombres heureuses (Ballet of the happy shadows) by German composer Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714-87). Trained in the accepted Italian style of operas, Gluck achieved his greatest success after he adapted the popular style of the new French plays and comic operas which were the rage in the 1750's.

@441 Franz Liszt's transcription of Schubert's song Gretchen am Spinnrade (Gretchen at the Spinning Wheel) is one of his finest. The original was composed on October 19, 1814 and is based on a text from Goethe's Faust. The melody rings out from a flowing accompaniment that sounds like running water. The calm opening rises to dramatic outbursts. As a master transcriber, Liszt (1811-86) produced piano versions of works by many other composers which are remarkably faithful to the originals. In concerts, Liszt often performed the transcriptions before the public had even heard the original versions. This one was written in 1838.

@442 French pianist Cécile Chaminade (1857-1944) was one of the first women to forge a composing career. She studied at the Paris Conservatory with Félix Le Coupey. Chaminade was known as a stylish pianist who also wrote more than two hundred salon style pieces. Her serious compositions included a Choral Symphony, the Concertstück, Opus 40, and two Piano Trios. Chaminade's salon compositions were popular enough to be played for three generations, although the performance of her music declined along with home music making. La Lisonjera (The Flatt'rer) is described by writer Maurice Hinson as "delicate and imaginative with some unexpected happenings."

@443 This is Franz Liszt's transcription of Schubert's song Ständchen von Shakespeare. The transcription was written in 1838. A cheerful theme is followed by a graceful but difficult variation. As a master transcriber, Liszt (1811-86) produced piano versions of works by many other composers which are remarkably faithful to the originals. In concerts, Liszt often performed the transcriptions before the public had even heard the original versions.

@444 The Erl-King (Erlkönig) poem was comes from the ballad-opera Die Fischerin (1872) by Goethe. In it, the Erl-King is King of all the spirits who appears before a child and tries to entice him to death. The most famous musical setting of this poem was Franz Schubert's (1797-1828) powerfully dramatic song by the same name, written when the composer was only 18 years old! The song is famous for the notoriously difficult and, at the time, revolutionary piano accompaniment. Franz Liszt's transcription for piano also has the rapid and powerful repeated octaves and chords, although in some ways is easier to play than the original. As a master transcriber, Liszt (1811-86) produced piano versions of works by many other composers which are remarkably faithful to the originals. In concerts, Liszt often performed the transcriptions before the public had even heard the original versions.

@445 The Song of the Voga Boatmen, more accurately titled Song of the Barge Haulers, was first published in St. Petersburg, Russia (1866) in A Collection of Russian Folksongs assembled by Mili Balakirev (1837-1910), composer of Islamey (found in The Pianist). This was the song of the "burlaks", the men who pulled grain boats upstream on the Volga River. The strong beats were used to keep the men in step. The song opens with the words, "Yo_ heave ho! Yo_ heave ho! Let us give a_pull, give another pull!"

@446 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modeled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 12 in E-flat major follows in both German and the English translation: Schlosser auf! Und mache Schlösser; Ohne Zahl! Denn die bösen, Mäuler; Will ich schliessen; Allzumal! (Locksmith, hearken! Make countless locks for the evil lips I shall seal with them once and for all!)

@447 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modeled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 13 in A-flat major follows in both German and the English translation: Vögelein durchrauscht die Luft, Sucht nach einem Aste; Und das Herz, ein Herz begehrt's, Wo es selig raste. (Bird will search the air far and wide for a branch to light on; so does one heart desire to join another heart in bliss.)

@448 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modeled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 14 in E-flat major follows in both German and the English translation: Sieh wie ist die Welle klar, Blickt der Mond hernieder; Die du meine Liebe bist, Liebe du mich wieder! (See how the waves shimmer where the moonlight falls; thou, who art my love, return my love!)

@449 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modeled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 15 in A-flat major follows in both German and the English translation: Nachtigall, sie singt so schön; Wenn die Sterne funkeln; Liebe mich, geliebtes Herz, Küsse mich im Dunkeln. (Nightingale, you sing so beautifully under the twinkling stars; love me, dear heart, kiss me in the darkness.)

@450 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modeled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 16 in F minor follows in both German and the English translation: Ein dunkeler Schacht ist Liebe, Ein gar zu gefährlicher Bronnen; Da fiel ich hinein, ich Armer. (A dark shaft is love, a dangerous well, into which, alas, I tumbled.)

@451 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modeled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 17 in D-flat major follows in both German and the English translation: Nicht wandle mein Licht, Dort aussen im Flurbereich! Die Füsse würden dir, die zarten, Zu nass, zu weich. (Wander not, light of my life, far out of reach upon the meadow, where it is too damp and soft for your tender feet!)

@452 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modeled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (Soprano, Alto, Tenor & Bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 18 in D-flat major follows in both German and the English translation: Es bebet das Gesträuche; Gestreift hat es im Fluge; Ein Vögelein. (The foliage trembles where a bird in flight has brushed against it.)

@453 The Rhapsodies, Op. 79 (1880) are two of the 30 shorter works for piano that Johannes Brahms (1833-97) composed in the later part of his life. This wonderful collection includes the Intermezzos of Opus 116, 117, 118 and 119, which are introspective, lyrical and display the subtle, incredibly moving range of emotions representing the mature Brahms. The Rhapsodies, which are very popular, are the boldest and most extroverted of these late piano works. They have true 19th century Romantic passion, but the fire is contained within the formal constraints of classical form. The magnificent Rhapsody No. 1 in B minor is in Rondo-Sonata form (a style of composition where the opening section returns throughout, sandwiched between contrasting sections).

@454 Frederic Chopin's Prelude in A-flat major, Op. Posthumous, was actually composed in 1834, two years before his famous set of 24 Preludes, Op. 28. It was published after the composer's death and appears today as Prelude No. 26. It is a charming work, similar in style to Chopin's "Butterfly" Etude, Op. 25, No. 9.

@455 Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death). The Prelude No. 1 in C major, Opus 28 is simply constructed, short and restless. Writer David Dubal calls it "an exquisite example of Chopin's devotion to Bach. Pulsating and agitated, it is over in half a minute, leaving the listener yearning for more."

@456 Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death). The memorable Prelude No. 2 in A minor, Opus 28 is slow, morbid and wonderfully dissonant.

@457 Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death). In Prelude No. 3 in G major, Opus 28, the left hand scurries about its accompaniment figuration with deft lightness as the right hand punctuates the activity with melody.

@458 Noble simplicity is the hallmark of the mere twelve bars of Chopin's Prelude No. 9 in E major, Opus 28. It is a duet between the bass and upper register of the piano. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@459 Chopin's Prelude No. 13 in F-sharp major, Opus 28 has been described by writer David Dubal as "a pearl of lyric serenity." This nocturne-like beauty is expressively melodic, with delicate balance within its texture. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@460 The grim unison between both hands of Chopin's Prelude No. 14 in E-flat minor, Opus 28, is reminiscent of the composer's Funeral March Sonata, although not so difficult. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@461 When one hears the dramatic opening chords, it's obvious that a storm is coming. In Chopin's Prelude No. 16 in B-flat minor, Opus 28, that storm is a torrent of virtuoso sixteenth notes in the right hand, anchored by powerful leaping chords in the left hand. The whole thing ends with a whirlwind of sixteenths at the octave for both hands and a decisive cadence. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@462 A gentle flow of rich chords supports an elegant melody in Chopin's Prelude No. 17 in A-flat major, Opus 28. It is moving, poetic music which feels sumptuous to the hands of the pianist, and to the ears of the listener. Mendelssohn wrote, "I love it! I cannot tell you how much or why; except perhaps that it is something which I could never at all have written." Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@463 In Chopin's Prelude No. 18 in F minor, Opus 28, one finds the emotional turbulence of a dramatic opera recitative. It has both intensity and brevity of expression. Quick and decisive fingers are required. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@464 Chopin's Prelude No. 19 in E-flat major, Opus 28, has a beauty that depends on the pianist's technical strength and graceful musicality. A glance at the printed page shows an uninterrupted flow of triplets in both hands. The musical eye will also discern lovely arching melody and wonderful harmonies. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@465 The resonating octave melody in the left hand and the Molto Agitato character gives Chopin's Prelude No. 22 in G minor, Opus 28, its foreboding, stormy quality. It is not excessively difficult to play, and so gives one's passions an easy outlet. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@466 There is a lovely gentleness to Chopin's Prelude No. 23 in F major, Opus 28. The harmony is warm and endearing. The gentle flow of sixteenth notes in the right hand can evoke the image of sunlight reflecting from the water of a quiet lake. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Chopin did write two more Preludes (included in The Pianist) -- No. 25 in C-sharp minor, published separately as Opus 45, and also No. 26 in A-flat major, published posthumously (after the composer's death).

@467 Prelude No. 25 in C-sharp minor, Opus 45 (composed and published in 1841). It is not linked to the set of 24 Preludes, Opus 28 and is generally played separately, if at all. It is a lovely work with the melody found in the right hand chords, threaded together with arpeggiated eighth notes in the left hand. An interesting feature is a cadenza made up of double notes in both hands near the end. Just as Carl Czerny's Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) of 1817 had inspired Chopin to create his own sets of Etudes, J.S. Bach's two magnificent sets of Preludes and Fugues, known as the Well-Tempered Clavier, inspired Chopin's own set of Preludes. They were published in 1839 and in keeping with Bach's WTF (two sets of 24), Chopin's Preludes, Opus 28 numbered 24 with each major and minor key represented. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes are not the introduction to a fugue or anything else. They are individual works based on individual ideas, moods or impressions. Like the preludes of later composers that they inspired, they stand alone as musical and artistic jewels, although played as a set, the key relationships and contrasting moods of each produce a satisfying whole. There have been many stories about the inspiration for some of the Preludes and about their creation as Chopin vacationed with his female writer/friend George Sand in Majorca. As fanciful as these stories are, they are more likely fantasies rather than truth. Chopin apparently wrote or sketched out most of the music before leaving for Majorca. What is undeniable is that the Preludes were held in the highest esteem by Chopin's musical contemporaries, such as Liszt and Schumann, and have remained an admired cornerstone of the piano repertoire. As someone once wrote, "If tears could be heard, they would sound like these preludes." Prelude No. 26 in A-flat major (included in The Pianist) was also published separately (after the composer's death).

@468 This is Balakirev's challenging arrangement of The Lark (Zhavoronok), a song composed by Russian composer Mikhail Ivanovich Glinka (1804-57) in 1840 and which was part of a set of twelve songs called A Farewell to St. Petersburg (Proshchaniye s Peterburgom) based on texts by his playwright friend Nestor Kukol'nik. Glinka is considered the father of the 19th century Russian nationalist school of composition. He had a profound influence on such composers as Balakirev and Tchaikovsky. (An interesting piece of trivia is that when Glinka was a boy, he had three piano lessons with Irish composer John Field.) Mili Balakirev (1837-1910), composer of Islamey (included in The Pianist), was the guiding spirit of the famed group of Russian composers known as 'The Five' (including Mussorgsky, Borodin, Cui and Rimsky-Korsakov).

@469 La Marseillaise, the French national anthem, was written by Claude Joseph Rouget de l'Isle in 1792 with the title, Chant de guerre pour l'armée du Rhin (War song for the Rhine army). It had been composed as a patriotic song supporting the French government in its war against Austria and Prussia in 1792. Volunteers from Marseilles heard the song and joined in a storming of the Tuileries on August 10, 1792. The title became Marches des Marseillais, and now simply La Marseillaise. Franz Liszt's "paraphrase de concert" appeared in 1841 paired with one of God Save the Queen (included in The Pianist). Liszt (1811-1886) wrote almost 400 piano transcriptions, arrangements, fantasies, paraphrases, variations, reminiscences, etc. They were a way of bringing infrequently performed orchestral works and the music of composers that Liszt was championing to the public. They also were vehicles for Liszt's piano virtuosity. Liszt's paraphrases were freely composed works based usually on operatic melodies.

@470 This is Ferrucio Busoni's transcription of J.S. Bach's Chorale Prelude, Ich ruf' zu dir, Herr (I Call On Thee, Lord), S.639. The chorale melody is given simple treatment, and there is a flowing arpeggio accompaniment in the inner voice. Bach (1685-1750) was considered the finest composer of Chorale Preludes, a type of organ composition popular in Germany during the Baroque period. In this kind of work, a chorale melody is used as the basis of an extended contrapuntal musical composition. Born in Italy but educated in Germany, Busoni (1866-1924) was one of the great pianistic talents of his time. Like many of history's legendary pianists, he not only possessed great keyboard skills but also significant compositional ability. His original music is rarely played today, however, some of his transcriptions of music by other composers survive both on stage and in recordings. In the preface to his Chorale Prelude transcriptions, Busoni explains that his sole purpose was to interest more people in "these compositions which are so rich in art, feeling and fantasy...." Therefore, they rarely require "the highest skill of the player, with the exception only of the art of pianoforte-touch which must certainly be at the player's command in performing these Chorale-Preludes."

@471 Camille Saint-Saëns (1835-1921) dashed off his Le carnaval des animaux (Carnival of the Animals) during a few days while on holiday in February 1886. The original scoring was for 2 pianos, 2 violins, viola, cello, double bass, flute, clarinet, glockenspiel and xylophone. It was to be performed at a Mardi-Gras concert that year organized by the cellist Lebouc. Saint-Saëns also arranged a cello & piano version of one movement, Le cygne (The Swan), which Lebouc played at the première. The work had been intended as a private joke and Saint-Saëns, who was worried about marring his sterling reputation as a composer, was surprised at its popularity. In fact, he forbade its performance during his lifetime. The orchestral score and parts of Le carnival des animaux were not published until the year after Saint-Saën's death.

@472 The Austrian-born Fritz Kreisler (1875-1962) was one of the greatest violinists of the century. Like many of the great Romantic and post-Romantic performers, he also was a skilled composer. During his concert career, he attributed many of his own works to different 17th and 18th century composers, claiming them to be newly discovered. He fooled and impressed both audiences and music critics of the time. Many of his charming short pieces for violin and piano have become staples of the repertory, including Liebesfreud, Liebesleid and Schön Rosmarin (Beautiful Rosemary), heard here in the piano arrangement from 1911.

@473 Franz Schubert's famous Ständchen (Serenade) was No. 4 in his song cycle Schwanengesang, completed in 1828. It was transcribed sensitively by Franz Liszt in 1838. The melody is heard in different registers of the piano, with pleasant echo effects, along with a simple chord accompaniment. As a master transcriber, Liszt (1811-86) produced piano versions of works by many other composers which are remarkably faithful to the originals. In concerts, Liszt often performed the transcriptions before the public had even heard the original versions.

@474 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modelled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 11 in C minor follows in both German and the English translation: Nein, es ist nicht auszukommen; Mit den Leuten, Alles wissen sie so giftig Auszudeuten. (Nay, there is no putting up with people who know everything and interpret it with poison tongues.)

@475 No one knows who penned the Blue Bells of Scotland (actually properly titled the Blue "Bell" of Scotland). However, an Irishwoman working as an actress in London sang it at the Drury Lane Theatre around the end of the 18th century and it became the popular hit of the time. The Scottish composer/writer William Wallace (1860-1940) wrote this theme and two variations on the old tune as part of his Woodland Sketches for piano.

@476 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modelled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 10 in G major follows in both German and the English translation: O wie sanft die Quelle sich; Durch die Wiese windet! O wie schön wenn Liebe sich; Zu der Liebe findet! (How gently the stream meanders through the meadows! O how beautiful, if love went forth to meet love in such a way!)

@477 French composer Charles Gounod (1818-93) apparently composed and first published a piano version of the Marche funèbre d'une marionnette (Funeral March of a Marionette) in London in 1872. A year later, he arranged it for orchestra. North Americans know it well as the theme song for The Alfred Hitchcock television show in the 1960's.

@478 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modelled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (Soprano, Alto, Tenor & Bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 9 in E major follows in both German and the English translation: Am Donaustrande, Da steht ein Haus, Da schaut ein rosiges; Mädchen aus. (On the Danube shore, there stands a house; and out of it, a rosy maiden gazes.)

@479 Franz Liszt wrote this transcription of Robert Schumann's song Widmung à ma fiancée (Dedication to my fiancée) in 1848. The original was composed in 1840, the year that Schumann was able to marry Clara Wieck after many years of opposition from her father. Of course, Clara is the fiancée. The poem which Schumann uses includes the words "Mir beschieden" (bequeathed to me), a reference to Clara. Liszt's transcription is bolder and more intense, but still has warmth. As a master transcriber, Liszt (1811-86) produced piano versions of works by many other composers which are remarkably faithful to the originals. In concerts, Liszt often performed the transcriptions before the public had even heard the original versions.
@
