

@540 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modelled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 4 in F major follows in both German and the English translation: Wie des Abends schöne Röthe; Möchte ich, arme Dirne, glüh'n, Einem, Einem zu Gefallen
Sonder Ende Wonne sprüh'n. (Like the lovely evening sunset, I would glow with endless delight, if someone but loved me.)

@541 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modelled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 5 in A minor follows in both German and the English translation: Die grüne Hopfenranke, Sie schlängelt auf der Erde hin. Die junge, schöne Dirne, So traurig ist ihr Sinn! (The green and tender vines
creep low along the ground; the beautiful young maiden is in a melancholy mood.0

@542 Antonin Dvorak (1841-1904) composed the Humoreske, Op. 101, No. 7 in G-flat major from August 7-27, 1894. It was first published in the autumn of 1894 as part of a set of eight Humoresques, Op. 101, which Dvorak had began in the summer of 1894 and completed in the summer of 1895. John Clapman, in his book Antonin Dvorak: Musician and Craftsman, claims that the composer originally intended to call them New Scottish Dances! Like most of Dvorak's music, it has a natural spontaneity while also displaying fine musical craftsmanship. No. 7 has become one of the most popular salon pieces of all time. Its popularity has been furthered by its inclusion in the repertoire of the international Suzuki method of music instruction. A curiosity is that you can sing Stephen Foster's Old Folks at Home in counterpoint to it. The late conductor of the Boston Pops Arthur Fiedler actually recorded this pairing in the 1960's in an RCA album called Holiday for Strings (which RCA re-issued on CD alongside Dvorak's 9th Symphony).

@543 La Regata Veneziana (Notturno) belongs to a set of eight chamber arias and four duets known as the Soirées musicales which Gioachino Rossini (1792-1868) completed in Paris between 1830-35. This was a difficult time in his life - ill health, questions about the annuity from the French government which had kept him comfortable (granted by King Charles the tenth, who had just died). They embrace many moods and are filled with beautiful melody and musical details that show Rossini had lost none of his creative abilities since retiring from the composition of opera. This is Franz Liszt's arrangement of La regata veneziana (Vogo o Tonio benedetto), No. 9 in the set.

@544 Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 (included in The Pianist), they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play. The title page has a dedication to Dr. Eduard Hanslick, the prominent music critic of the time. Brahms also created a solo version, as well as a simplified solo version. In performances of the complete set, the familiar Waltz No. 15 is often repeated at the end. Waltz No. 1 in B major opens the set with a burst of energy. The tempo is marked "tempo giusto", which means strict. The opening and closing is staccato, with a contrasting legato in the middle.

@545 Waltz No. 2 in E major is a soothing contrast to the opening of the set. It has a gentle lilt and a subtle hint of urgency in the rhythm. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@546 Waltz No. 3 in G-sharp minor has a sadly pensive mood. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@547 Waltz No. 4 in E minor has emotionally tortured little twists to the melody. It is marked "appassionato", although the passion is restrained. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@548 Waltz No. 5 in E major, which begins with the melody in the middle register, is exceptionally beautiful. The flowing secondo part gives a controlled urgency to the music. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@549 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modelled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 2 in A minor follows in both German and the English translation: Am Gesteine rauscht die Fluth, Heftig angetrieben; Wer da nicht zu seufzen weiss, Lernt es unter'm Lieben. (Against the rocks dash foaming waves; whoever has not yet learned sighing, will learn it through love.)

@550 Waltz No. 7 in C-sharp minor is a relaxed Andante with some exquisite harmony. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@551 George Gershwin (1898-1937) was one of the most-gifted composers to emerge from the United States. His combination of jazz, ragtime and blues has a unique freshness which is immediately recognizeable and forever memorable. Rialto Ripples is a piano rag that was co-written by Gershwin and Will Donaldson in 1917, just a few years after Gershwin had left school to be a pianist and 'song-plugger' in New York City's legendary 'Tin Pan Alley' of music publishers, and seven years before his beginning a string of successes such as Rhapsody in Blue (1924), Concerto in F (1925) and American in Paris (1928).

@552 Moritz Moszkowski (1854-1925) is most widely known for his Spanish Dances, Op. 12, originally composed for piano duet but, because of popular demand, arranged by the composer for piano solo (the solo version heard here). Moszkowski's salon music is well-crafted and requires an accurate, delicate technique for successful performance. In the early part of the twentieth century, almost everyone with a piano had a copy of the Spanish Dances. They were so popular that Moszkowski tried unsuccessfully to equal the success by composing more music from other lands, including his New Spanish Dances, Op. 65, and From Foreign Lands. Dance No. 2, in G minor and marked "con sentimento", has a touch of sadness.

@553 Moritz Moszkowski (1854-1925) is most widely known for his Spanish Dances, Op. 12, originally composed for piano duet but, because of popular demand, arranged by the composer for piano solo (the solo version heard here). Moszkowski's salon music is well-crafted and requires an accurate, delicate technique for successful performance. In the early part of the twentieth century, almost everyone with a piano had a copy of the Spanish Dances. They were so popular that Moszkowski tried unsuccessfully to equal the success by composing more music from other lands, including his New Spanish Dances, Op. 65, and From Foreign Lands. Dance No. 3 in A major, marked Con Moto (with movement), is perhaps the most appealing. The left hand maintains a strong rhythmic pulse while a sixteenth note melody scampers and soars in the right hand.

@554 Moritz Moszkowski (1854-1925) is most widely known for his Spanish Dances, Op. 12, originally composed for piano duet but, because of popular demand, arranged by the composer for piano solo (the solo version heard here). Moszkowski's salon music is well-crafted and requires an accurate, delicate technique for successful performance. In the early part of the twentieth century, almost everyone with a piano had a copy of the Spanish Dances. They were so popular that Moszkowski tried unsuccessfully to equal the success by composing more music from other lands, including his New Spanish Dances, Op. 65, and From Foreign Lands. Dance No. 4 in B-flat major, Allegro Comodo (comfortably fast), is simpler and more easily danceable. The texture is mainly chordal and one rarely finds anything faster than eighth notes.

@555 This is Ferrucio Busoni's transcription of J.S. Bach's Chorale Prelude, Komm, Gott, Schöpfer, Heilger Geist (Come, God, Creator!), S.667. Bach (1685-1750) was considered the finest composer of Chorale Preludes, a type of organ composition popular in Germany during the Baroque period. In this kind of work, a chorale melody is used as the basis of an extended contrapuntal musical composition. Born in Italy but educated in Germany, Busoni (1866-1924) was one of the great pianistic talents of his time. Like many of history's legendary pianists, he not only possessed great keyboard skills but also significant compositional ability. His original music is rarely played today, however, some of his transcriptions of music by other composers survive both on stage and in recordings. In the preface to his Chorale Prelude transcriptions, Busoni explains that his sole purpose was to interest more people in "these compositions which are so rich in art, feeling and fantasy...." Therefore, they rarely require "the highest skill of the player, with the exception only of the art of pianoforte-touch which must certainly be at the player's command in performing these Chorale-Preludes."

@556 J.S. Bach (1685-1750) was considered the finest composer of Chorale Preludes, a type of organ composition popular in Germany during the Baroque period. In this kind of work, a chorale melody is used as the basis of an extended contrapuntal musical composition. This is an arrangement by Ferrucio Busoni of one of Bach's most popular Chorale Preludes, Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme (Awake, the voice commands), S.645. Born in Italy but educated in Germany, Busoni (1866-1924) was one of the great pianistic talents of his time. Like many of history's legendary pianists, he not only possessed great keyboard skills but also significant compositional ability. His original music is rarely played today, however, some of his transcriptions of music by other composers survive both on stage and in recordings. In the preface to his Chorale Prelude transcriptions, Busoni explains that his sole purpose was to interest more people in "these compositions which are so rich in art, feeling and fantasy...." Therefore, they rarely require "the highest skill of the player, with the exception only of the art of pianoforte-touch which must certainly be at the player's command in performing these Chorale-Preludes."

@557 This is Ferrucio Busoni's transcription of J.S. Bach's exceptionally beautiful Chorale Prelude, Nun komm' der Heiden Heiland (Now comes the gentiles' Saviour). It is filled with lovely ornamentation that demands expressiveness and a singing tone. Bach (1685-1750) was considered the finest composer of Chorale Preludes, a type of organ composition popular in Germany during the Baroque period. In this kind of work, a chorale melody is used as the basis of an extended contrapuntal musical composition. Born in Italy but educated in Germany, Busoni (1866-1924) was one of the great pianistic talents of his time. Like many of history's legendary pianists, he not only possessed great keyboard skills but also significant compositional ability. His original music is rarely played today, however, some of his transcriptions of music by other composers survive both on stage and in recordings. In the preface to his Chorale Prelude transcriptions, Busoni explains that his sole purpose was to interest more people in "these compositions which are so rich in art, feeling and fantasy...." Therefore, they rarely require "the highest skill of the player, with the exception only of the art of pianoforte-touch which must certainly be at the player's command in performing these Chorale-Preludes."

@558 This is Ferrucio Busoni's challenging transcription of J.S. Bach's exceptionally beautiful Chorale Prelude, Nun freut euch, lieben Christen (Rejoice, beloved Christians). There is quick counterpoint while the actual chorale appears in an inner part. Bach (1685-1750) was considered the finest composer of Chorale Preludes, a type of organ composition popular in Germany during the Baroque period. In this kind of work, a chorale melody is used as the basis of an extended contrapuntal musical composition. Born in Italy but educated in Germany, Busoni (1866-1924) was one of the great pianistic talents of his time. Like many of history's legendary pianists, he not only possessed great keyboard skills but also significant compositional ability. His original music is rarely played today, however, some of his transcriptions of music by other composers survive both on stage and in recordings. In the preface to his Chorale Prelude transcriptions, Busoni explains that his sole purpose was to interest more people in "these compositions which are so rich in art, feeling and fantasy...." Therefore, they rarely require "the highest skill of the player, with the exception only of the art of pianoforte-touch which must certainly be at the player's command in performing these Chorale-Preludes."

@559 This is Ferrucio Busoni's transcription of J.S. Bach's Chorale Prelude, In Dir ist Freude (In Thee is Joy), S.615. Bach (1685-1750) was considered the finest composer of Chorale Preludes, a type of organ composition popular in Germany during the Baroque period. In this kind of work, a chorale melody is used as the basis of an extended contrapuntal musical composition. Born in Italy but educated in Germany, Busoni (1866-1924) was one of the great pianistic talents of his time. Like many of history's legendary pianists, he not only possessed great keyboard skills but also significant compositional ability. His original music is rarely played today, however, some of his transcriptions of music by other composers survive both on stage and in recordings. In the preface to his Chorale Prelude transcriptions, Busoni explains that his sole purpose was to interest more people in "these compositions which are so rich in art, feeling and fantasy...." Therefore, they rarely require "the highest skill of the player, with the exception only of the art of pianoforte-touch which must certainly be at the player's command in performing these Chorale-Preludes."

@560 Franz Liszt (1811-86) composed his set of 9 Soirées de Vienne - Valse-Caprices d'après Schubert in 1852. They are paraphrases or elaborations of Schubert waltzes. No. 6 has a spirited, rhythmic opening which leads into two expressive waltz themes. The second turns into sparkling variations with light and graceful fingerwork. This is an impressive combination of virtuosity and grace.

@561 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The Etude in E-flat minor, Op. 10, No. 6 is not technically difficult but requires musicianship and sensitivity to find the right balance for its elegaic lyricism and emotional darkness.

@562 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. In the Etude in E-flat, Op. 10, No. 11, a succession of harp-like arpeggios spread between both hands support a delicately phrased melody.

@563 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The Etude in C-sharp minor, Op. 10, No. 4, is a test for both hands which requires both velocity and light agility.

@564 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The Etude in F minor, Op. 25, No. 2 (dedicated to Marie d'Algoult) is a subtle exercise in cross-rhythms, with the right hand playing eighth note triplets while the left produces quarter note triplets.

@565 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The Etude in A-flat, Op. 10, No. 10 is one of Chopin's most challenging. The chords can be especially tiring for the right hand. There are many variations in touch and rhythm. This is Romanticism in all its glory. According to the great 19th century German pianist Von Bülow, "He who can play this study in a really finished manner may congratulate himself on having climbed to the highest point of the pianist's Parnassus."

@566 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The Etude in F, Op. 25, No. 3 demands speed, lightness and rhythmic precision.

@567 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The seemingly tongue-in-cheek grace notes of Etude in E minor, Op. 25, No. 5 have illicited the nickname "Wrong Note" Etude. It requires great variation in touch. The distinctive contrasting middle section features a beautifully singing melody in the left hand while the right hand produces a delicate accompaniment. The Etude finishes with a little Coda characterized by imaginative trills in both hands.

@568 One of Debussy¹s earliest works for piano is the Mazurka, said to have been composed in 1891 but probably actually written as far back as 1880 when the composer was still at the Conservatoire. It is certainly not vintage Debussy, and shows the influence of the composer¹s piano teacher, Mme. Mauté de Fleurville, herself a pupil of Chopin. Its publication history is interesting. Debussy apparently sold it to two different publishers, Hamelle (which printed it) and Choudons (which bought it along with Rêverie in March 1891). Hartmann also bought it, and in 1902, Fromont got hold of and published the music, apparently to Debussy¹s annoyance, in 1905.

@569 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. In the Etude in A minor, Op. 25, No. 4, the performer is challenged not only by the rapidly leaping staccato left hand, but by many subtle variations of touch in the right hand.

@570 When Muzio Clementi composed his collection of one hundred piano studies, Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnasus) in 1817, he spawned a succession of imitators, including Cramer and Czerny, climaxing with the brilliantly inspired collections by Fréderic Chopin. Unlike the mountains of scales and arpeggios representing late-18th century piano techniques, Chopin's "Etudes" successfully merge sophisticated musical/technical challenges with the artistry and insight of a great composer - they are both studies and memorable pieces of music which show the whole range of Chopin's genius. His first set of Etudes, published as Opus 10, were dedicated to "son ami," Franz Liszt. Together with the Opus 25 collection, they present twenty-four challenges to both musical mind and body. The mighty Etude in C minor, Op. 25, No. 12 has been nicknamed the "Ocean" Etude, no doubt because of the waves of powerful arpeggios in both hands. The right hand thumb rings out a B-A-C-H chorale theme (in German, B means B-flat and H means B natural).

@571 Johannes Brahms (1833-97) modelled his Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52 on the light-hearted Schubert Ländlers (a type of slow waltz originating in Austria's Landel). They appeared in 1869 for piano duet with optional (ad libitum) vocal quartet (soprano, alto, tenor & bass). The same set of eighteen waltzes were published without the vocal parts as Op. 52a. The verse for the waltzes are from the poem Polydora by Daumer. The opening of the verse for Waltz No. 1 in E major follows in both German and the English translation: Rede Mädchen, allzu liebes, Das mir in die Brust, die kühle, Hat geschleudert mit dem Blicke, Diese wilden Gluthgefühle! (Speak, O maiden all too dear, whose glance has aroused in my calm heart, these wild and passionate feelings,)

@572 Waltz No. 12 in E major is gently expressive, with interesting shades of emotion. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@573 Waltz No. 13 in C major has a sturdy, rustic energy which makes it unique in the set. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@574 Waltz No. 14 in A minor is an energetic gallop. The little grace notes add extra energy to the staccato thirds. The final crescendo builds to a strong conclusion. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@575 The familiar Waltz No. 15 in A major is the melody of everyone's childhood memory. This little jewel is often played again after Waltz No. 16 to conclude a complete performance of the set. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@576 In Waltz No. 16 in D minor, the Secondo part has the darkly expressive melody in the piano's low middle register. The Primo part has a high counter melody making this waltz like a vocal duet. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@577 Alexander Siloti (1863-1945) was a student of Zverev, Nikolai Rubinstein and Liszt. He later carried on the Romantic tradition of playing as a teacher of Rachmaninov and, after he became a teacher at the Julliard School of Music in New York, a whole generation of young pianists. In the same tradition, Siloti wrote many transcriptions for the piano including this one of the lovely little Prelude in B minor by J.S. Bach (1685-1750) which first appeared as Prelude No. 5 in the Klavier Büchlein für Wilhelm Friedemann Bach, later catalogued as BMV 855a. Siloti adds pedalling and arpeggiated chords in the left hand, although keeps the general simplicity of the prelude.

@578 Anton Stepanovich Arensky (1861-1906) composed nearly one hundred piano pieces. Although he is not well known outside of his native Russia, his music is attractive and displays an easy lyricism reminiscent of Tchaikovsky. Arensky composed serious works, such as his Twelve Etudes and Logaoedics, Opus 28 (or Essays with Forgotten Rhythms, in which he tries to musically translate old Greek poetical rhythms), however, he also produced excellent music in salon style, such as his Impromptu in B major which appeared in a collection of four pieces as Opus 25 (including a Rêverie, Etude on a Chinese Theme, and Scherzino). 

@579 It was fitting that the great Franz Liszt (1811-1886) transcribed all of Beethoven's nine symphonies for solo piano. He was a great promoter of Beethoven in his own recitals, giving the first public performances of many of the composer's sonatas. As a master transcriber, he produced piano versions of the symphonies, as well as works by many other composers, which are remarkably faithful to the originals. In concerts, Liszt often performed the transcriptions before the public had even heard the original versions. His version of the Beethoven symphonies were arranged between 1837-64. This is the first movement of Beethoven's "Pastoral" Symphony No. 6. The symphony was first published in 1809 with a dedication to the Duc de Raudnitz and the Comte de Rasumoffsky. There is little drama in the first movement of this aptly nicknamed symphony which is gently melodic. The descriptive heading for the movement is "The awakening of cheerful feelings on arriving in the country."

@580 Claude Debussy's (1862-1918) Prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune (Prelude to the afternoon of a faun) was composed between 1892-94 and first performed in Paris on December 22 and 23, 1894. The performance was so successful that the conductor had to repeat it. It was a tone-poem intended to be an orchestral "impression" of the poem by Stéphane Mallarmé. When Mallarmé heard it for the first time in the piano arrangement, he said to Debussy, "This music prolongs the emotion of my poem and fixes the scene much more vividly than colour could have done." Debussy had intended it to become a set of three works (including an Interlude and Paraphrase Finale which he managed to sketch out) but only completed the Prelude. There are two main themes -- one at the very beginning (a solo flute in the orchestral version) and a bolder one which follows (played by the woodwinds). The interplay between these themes constitutes the prelude. In 1912, Nijinsky danced to the music, with choreography by Diaghilev. This was the first orchestral work of this kind composed by the young Debussy. This solo arrangement is by the composer.

@581 The eminent English composer John Ireland (1879-1962) wrote his London Pieces between 1917-20. They are three striking pictures of life in the great city. Soho Forenoons is the third in the set which includes Chelsea Reach and Ragamuffin (included in The Pianist). Ireland was a fine miniaturist, composing short works which sensitively conjure colorful images. The music is mildy modern with hints of English folk song. Soho Forenoons has lovely melody and sophisticated harmony. There are some moderately challenging passages.

@582 Waltz No. 6 in C-sharp major is a light and lively shower of staccato sounds. Pairs of slurred notes provide contrast in the middle. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@583 Waltz No. 8 in B-flat major has an uplifting and happy nature. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@584 Waltz No. 9 in D minor, with its halting melody constructed of slurred pairs of quarter notes, sounds as if it is constantly asking a question (or "meowing" like a cat!). Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@585 Waltz No. 10 in G major, with its swooping melody of eighth notes in thirds, swirls with buoyant energy. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@586 Waltz No. 11 in B minor, while simple, has interesting turns of harmony. Johannes Brahms' Waltzes for Piano with four hands, Op. 39 were first published in 1866, although they had probably been accumulating on the composer's desk for many years before that. They were completed in January of 1865, just before the death of Brahms' mother. Like the Liebesliederwalzer (Love-song waltzes), Op. 52, they are inspired by Schubert. There is a pleasant lightness to the sound and all of them are a joy to play.

@

