@011 McDermott, Tom\ McDermott, Tom (1957-) Born in St. Louis in 1957, McDermott's first musical influence was his mother, who has played piano all her life and who was a church organist for 40 years.  McDermott began piano lessons at age 6 and being playing ragtime in 1973, during the first years of the Scott Joplin revival.  His professional career began when he was 16. McDermott became interested in early jazz, especially that of Jelly Roll Morton and the New York stride players like Fats Waller and James P. Johnson.  He began composing rags, which were recorded in 1980 on the LP New Rags  on the Stomp Off label.  After receiving an undergraduate degree in art from St. Louis University, he began writing music criticism for local publications, eventually becoming the jazz and rock critic for the Globe-Democrat,  St. Louis's morning paper.   Deciding at this time that he needed a music degree, he entered Washington University in St. Louis, and received a Master's Degree in Jazz Studies in December 1982.In the early 1980s McDermott first became acquainted with the music of New Orleans pianists Professor Longhair, Dr. John and James Booker.  His infatuation with their music compelled him to move to the Crescent City in 1984, and except for occasional forays to Europe and Japan, he has worked steadily there ever since.  Highlights of his post-St. Louis career have included a three-week stint at Hanratty's, the New York stride piano showcase in 1985 (well-reviewed by The New York Times );  playing and composing for the movie He Said, She Said  in 1990;  arranging a cut on the Dirty Dozen tribute to Jelly Roll Morton; and as a member of the Dukes of Dixieland, a band he joined in 1990, recording an all-Jelly Roll Morton CD with jazz legend Danny Barker as special guest in 1992.  His compositions are marked by a fascination for polyrhythms.

@012 Professor Longhair\ Professor Longhair (1918-1980) Born Henry Roeland "Roy" Byrd in Bogalusa, LA, December 19, 1918, the man who became known as Professor Longhair, or Fess, was to become the major influence-despite a limited though highly original style and idiosyncratic way of playing the piano-on Fats Domino, Mac Rebennack (Dr. John), Allen Toussaint, James Booker, Huey Smith, Smiley Lewis, the Meters, and just about every other New Orleans R & B piano player.  He first rose to prominence in the early 50s, but by the mid-60s had sunk into obscurity, having become a mysterious legend to blues aficionados around the world.  Then he was rediscovered in the early 70s, recorded several LPs, then died on the eve of success in 1980, having taken his place at the forefront of New Orleans R & B piano pantheon, with a New Orleans nightclub, Tipitina's dedicated to his memory. A captivating performer, both during his early and late periods of notoriety, he would stir crowds to swaying and dancing with his oddball songs, and his highly rhythmic piano playing, which he said combined "rumba, mambo and Calypso," but which also was strongly blues- and shuffle-based.  His distinctive voice, thin-toned, almost yodeling and cracking on the high notes, became an icon; its vocal "quality" was immaterial.  Nearly as important was his whistling. Byrd's father deserted him, his older brother and his mother Ella Mae shortly after he was born, so she brought the family to New Orleans, settling in a tenement in the central business district, which was later torn down to make room for the new City Hall.  The teenage Byrd tap-danced for tips on Bourbon and Rampart Streets with his buddies.  They eventually developed an act in which Byrd danced while the other two beat our rhythms on old orange crates or tin cans.  Byrd's mother played a number of instruments and showed him the basics on them.  He first tried guitar, but gave up soon because the strings kept breaking and it made his fingers sore.   Although underage, he would hang out at a club called Delpee's, which featured piano players.  These were the old boogie-woogie and barrelhouse artists, most of whom never recorded, names like Robert Bertrand, Kid Stormy Weather, Little Brother Montgomery, Drive 'Em Down, and Sullivan Rock.  He also came under the influence of Isador "Tuts" Washington (1907-1984), who showed him the basics of stride piano, although Byrd's hands couldn't reach Washington's tenths.  At one point Byrd became interested in the drums and bought himself a set piece by piece, but he gave up on them because they were to cumbersome, turning his attention to the piano. Like Morton a generation earlier, Byrd tried to represent the other band instruments in his piano playing, particularly the drums and guitar, both of which he had tried.  This gave his music a particular direction, a purpose, which he worked out in what became his very innovative but very awkward style on the piano-the style which eventually became a standard in the genre. During this period of musical development he learned the classic "Pinetop's Boogie-Woogie" from Sullivan Rock (Rocky Sullivan), whom he had met in a speakeasy around 1936. He also began to get hired, along with his street entertainer friends in the Lincoln and Palace theaters on weekends.  They developed their act to include acrobatics including dancing up and down four-foot walls.  But Byrd only stayed with this a month, since he objected to the comedian throwing pies in his face.   He also developed a passion for card-playing around this time, especially the game of coon-can.  He got so good at it that he later supported his family on his gambling winnings at this game. Byrd's first professional job was at the Cotton Club on Rampart Street with champion Jack Dupree.  Although 8 years his senior, Dupree eagerly studied Byrd's licks and tricks on the piano, in exchange for teaching Byrd to sing.  Longhair stopped tap-dancing due to a knee problem around that time but spent more time on piano playing and gambling.  In 1937 Byrd spent six months in the Civilian Conservation Corps doing infrastructural work such as building levees, grading roads, digging spillways and landscaping the highways.  He realized he could avoid some of the heavy work by entertaining his fellow workers on the recreation hall piano.  It was also during this time as he travelled around Louisiana, that he came into contact with rumba and Calypso bands, which made a deep impression on him. Back in New Orleans his primary interest was in playing coon-can;  he took piano jobs whenever he ran out of money to get back in the game.  He even tried boxing, but gave that up when he got his front teeth knocked out in a back-alley fight. After a two-year stint in the army ending in a medical discharge due to a hernia and burst appendix, Byrd went into partnership in a soul food restaurant, teaching himself to cook, with a little gambling and sales of cheap items on the side.  He married, but stayed with his wife only month, although he could not divorce her until 1975, the day before he married his second wife and companion of many years, Alice Walton Byrd.  After the war his partner bought him out, and Byrd returned to coon-can and piano playing to supplement it. Byrd's big break came in 1948 at the Caledonia Club, located at the corner of St. Claude and St. Philip Streets.  Dave Bartholomew was playing there with his orchestra, and Byrd asked to sit in.  Once he started playing the audience reacted with immediate enthusiasm, and people started pouring into the club.  The owner, Mike Tessitore, then fired Bartholomew and hired Byrd on the spot.  Byrd hired his own band, which was billed as the Three Hair Combo "featuring Professor Longhair, Shorthair, and No Hair." Byrd was now in demand among club owners.  In October of 1949 he made his first recording in a makeshift studio for the Dallas-based Star Talent label.  He called his group "Professor Longhair and his Shuffling Hungarians" and recorded "She Ain't Got No Hair" and the original "Mardi Gras in New Orleans."  The record was never released, however, because the session was held under non-union conditions.  At that time it was considered unusual to record songs about Mardi Gras, so Byrd's song was an innovation.	His first released recording turned out to be a success on the R & B charts, reaching  no. 5 in August, 1950.  It was "Baldhead," a remake of "She Ain't Got No Hair"  on the Mercury label.  Byrd had to record under his own name, Roy Byrd, in order to avoid legal hassles from Star Talent. He next recorded for Atlantic (even before the Mercury recording became a success), cutting ten sides to make a total of three singles, including "Mardi Gras in New Orleans," "Professor Longhair Blues," and "Walk Your Blues Away."  They sold very well locally.  In 1951 Byrd changed to the Federal label and recorded "Curly Haired Baby" and "Gone So Long" for it, the latter becoming a modest hit in Louisiana and Texas. In 1952, Byrd went on a short midwestern tour with Dave Bartholomew and Fats Domino.  Even though Fats was better known through his record sales, Byrd consistently upstaged him with his wild antics on the piano, including walking across the keys.  He also bested Fats at coon-can during the long stretches in the back of Fats's Cadillac between stops.  In 1953, Byrd recorded his famous "Tipitina" for Atlantic (with Earl Palmer, Red Tyler, Lee Allen and Frank Fields as sidemen), which became a local hit.  But since he appeared live only at small clubs in New Orleans, the record did not catch on beyond the Gulf Coast.In 1954, Byrd suffered a mild stroke which stopped him from performing.  His common-law wife  Alice Walton, was forced to take in laundry for the family to survive, and Byrd went back to coon-can playing.  He began recording again the following year, but by 1958, after recording for Ron Records his popularity began to wane, giving way to newer performers such as Lee Dorsey, Irma Thomas and Ernie K-Doe.  Most of his work came around Carnival time, and on Mardi Gras day in 1960 he was arrested for suspicion of drug possession. His musical spirits briefly return when he recorded Earl King's "Big Chief" for Watch records in 1963, but due to bad release timing and weak promotion the record did not do well, and Byrd's enthusiasm for music began to sink again.  He resorted to sweeping up around Joe Assunto's One-Stop Record shop on South Rampart Street, abandoned by record companies.  Byrd remained in poverty, dejection and obscurity until rescued by two young jazz enthusiasts, Quint Davis and Allison Minor, who had put together the first New Orleans Jazz Festival in Congo Square in 1969.  The following year they brought international festival producer George Wein in on the project, and when he happened to hear a recording of Professor Longhair he told them they'd better find him if they wanted to do a festival in New Orleans.  It took them nearly a year, but they finally ran into him at the One-Stop record shop, suffering from a vitamin deficiency, toothless, his knee in terribly shape and hardly able to digest food or urinate.  They took care of him and got him to perform at the still fledgling 1971 festival.  He was the hit of the event. After having difficulties fending off what seemed like an army of would-be managers, Quint Davis assumed the job.  A demo session in 1972 really set things going.  Byrd cut 34 songs in a Baton Rouge studio, and they came to the attention of Atlantic records president Jerry Wexler and The Band manager Albert Grossman.  As a result, Wexler arranged a European tour for Byrd in 1973 which included Paris and Montreux, in which he was accompanied by Allen Toussaint and the Meters.  Atlantic also issued a "New Orleans Piano" album as part of their six-part Blues Originals   series, which collected Byrd's sessions from 1949 to 1953.  The album attracted attention world-wide and gave Professor Longhair another boost. His life was now transformed: his health had radically improved and he began to be concerned with business matters.  Throughout the dark times he had remained intensely loyal to his family, which had been a source of strength, especially in the person of his wife Alice Walton Byrd, but he had forbidden his children from taking up music.  But the R & B club scene was still in its infancy, and Byrd found no steady work.  The late Jed Palmer, owner of Jed's on Maple Street (now Muddy Waters) was the first to hire him and charge a cover charge-$1.  Byrd and his family moved into a house on South Rampart Street which Quint Davis had rented as a rehearsal hall, but it burned to the ground during Jazz Fest 1974, and Byrd lost everything.  A benefit only raised $4500, so the French label Barclay fronted the money for another album,  Rock 'n' Roll Gumbo,  which turned out to be one of his best. Byrd began playing for dances at the 501 Club and Davis gave over his management completely to Allison Minor, since the Jazz Festival was taking up all of his energies.  Paul McCartney noticed him when the ex-Beatle was in New Orleans to record an album at Allen Toussaint's studio Sea-Saint in 1976, and he hired Byrd to play for a part aboard the Queen Mary, which was recorded on Harvest  (a subsidiary of Capitol).  At the time Byrd had never heard of the Beatles. In 1977 a group of Byrd's local admirers bought the 501 Club (at 501 Napoleon Ave.) and turned it into Tipitina's.  There Byrd put on exciting performances, memories of which are treasured by those who saw him.  Byrd finally had a stable income, and he was a generous man. He was in demand world-wide and would jet off for appearances to New York, Chicago, Los Angeles or London. In November, 1979, he recorded Crawfish Fiesta  at Sea-Saint with a stellar band, including Dr. John on guitar.  The results were excellent and preparations were made for a big release celebration.  But Byrd died of a heart attack in his sleep less than a day before the album was to be sold in record stores, January 30, 1980.

@013 Ridgley, Tommy\ Ridgley, Tommy (1925-) One of 17 children, Tommy Ridgley, born October 30, 1925, grew up very poor.  As a child he hunted for scraps of metal and bottles to sell for food money, but was scrupulously honest-since, according to him, his grandfather and two uncles were ministers.  He had no access to a piano during his early years but was surrounded by music.  His great uncle, trombonist William "Bebé" Ridgley, 1882-1961, had founded the Original Tuxedo Orchestra and the Tuxedo Brass band. In 1942 Ridgley joined the navy, and while stationed in Massachusetts found time to practice the piano.  He had heard "The Junker" as a child, and it came back to him and formed basis for his playing.  When he got out of the service he began formal music study and started to realize his vocal abilities, ranging from blues to ballads.  In 1949 he cut his first record for Imperial under Dave Bartholomew's direction.  It was "Shrewsbury Blues," making reference to the New Orleans suburb where he had grown up.  It showed him to have a powerful R & B voice, which became an important force in this genre in New Orleans for the next 30 years. Discouraged by low sales, he switched to Decca in 1952, then to Ahmet Ertegun's Atlantic in 1953, and on which he recorded "I'm Gonna Cross that River" and "Ooh Lawdy My Baby" with Ray Charles on piano.  Both met with sold local success.  Later her played piano on the popular instrumental  "Jam Up," which appeared on a number of anthology albums. His record sales helped promote his local live performances, and he kept busy during this period with a well-organized, dependable band.  In 1957 he recorded "When I Meet My Girl" and "I've Heard That Story Before" for the New York label Herald/Ember, with Lee Allen, Red Tyler and Melvin Lastie.  "When I Meet My Girl" was essentially a remake of the traditional tune "The Irish Washerwoman" with a syncopated beat supplied by drummer Charles "Hungry" Williams. From 1957 through 1964  Ridgley and his band the Untouchables were the resident band at the New Orleans Municipal Auditorium, playing for touring rock and roll groups, including one with popstar Bobby Darin (in 1957), in which both bands appeared on-stage for the finale, in defiance of the usual racial barriers.  During this period Ridgley's band gave soul singer Irma Thomas her start.  Ridgley's band was also very active on the college fraternity circuit during this time.  In 1960 Ridgley signed with Ron Records under Joe Ruffino and cut some of his best songs including "In the Same Old Way" and Ivory Joe Hunter's "I Love You Yes I Do."  After 1973 Ridgley turned more to production and had  a local hit with Rose Davis' "Sittin' and Drinkin'."  He issued a retrospective LP Through the Years  in 1984, and Rounder recorded him on  New Orleans King of the Stroll  in 1988.  He makes occasional appearances today, especially on piano nights at Tipitina's, displaying his thick, percussive R & B piano style, and with his band at Margaritaville.

@014 Simpson, Joel\ Simpson, Joel (1946-) Producer and writer of, and performer in the New Orleans Pianist, Joel Simpson was born in New Jersey November 26, 1946,  and grew up in Union.  He began playing piano at age 6 and started lessons at  8.  His interest in jazz started  around age 12.  He travelled widely during and after college, including study abroad learning French, Italian and German, which later served him when he performed abroad. He received a doctorate in comparative literature from Brown in 1976.  His first job was teaching English at the University of New Orleans (1973-78), which is what brought him to the Crescent City.   But in 1978 he left academia for jazz piano.  He got a job on Bourbon Street, and resigned from the University.  He also played in the theatrical production One Mo' Time ), took a variety of other jobs, including translation/interpretation (French and Italian) and compugraphics and eventually  worked in most of the major hotels in New Orleans, replacing Tuts Washington at the Pontchartrain in 1983.  In 1980 he began a sideline as a jazz journalist writing music reviews for local publications, later becoming the Down Beat  correspondent for New Orleans.  From 1988 to 1990 he did weekly reports on jazz in New Orleans to the Italian radio network in Rome in Italian.  1987 was the first year he led a band in  the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival.    In 1989  he made a quintet album Subterranean Sweetie with a grant he had won for his compositions, and he put it out on his own JSS label.   In 1990 his group performed at La Foire de Niort in Niort, France  and at the Pompeii Jazz Festival.  In 1991 he performed an extended run in Rome with vocalist Betty Shirley, and in 1993 he made two solo jazz piano appearances in France. He has also been an active electronic music composer since 1986, both in commercial scoring and as composer of purely artistic works. In 1991 he created In the Beginning Was the Rhythm, a one-hour jazz lecture/demonstration which addresses the structural evolution of early jazz and the origins and social significance of New Orleans rhythm and blues, which became an audiocassette and transcript booklet in 1992.  The package  is available directly from him ($20 ppd., 902 Montegut St., New Orleans, LA 70117).

@015 Smith, Huey "Piano"\ Smith, Huey "Piano" (1934-) Born in New Orleans January 26, 1934, Huey Smith rose to prominence during the formative years of R & B in the 1950s only to fall back into obscurity in the late 1960's.  His early musical influences included Dinah Washington, Ivory Joe Hunter, Bull Moose Jackson, Charles Brown and even Hank Williams.  But his main influence at this stage was Louis Jordan, the famous band leader precursor of rock and roll.  Later Smith's piano style became heavily influenced by Professor Longhair (Henry Roeland "Roy" Byrd).  Smith teamed up with Eddie Jones, AKA Guitar Slim in 1949, and played some backups on some of Slim's recordings.  He first recorded under his own name in 1953, following a giant audition held by Savoy records.  He cut "You Made Me Cry" and "You're Down on Me," pounding at the piano and singing in a somewhat strained, still immature voice. Smith did session work for Smiley Lewis (the intro on "I Hear You Knocking") as well as with Lloyd Price and Little Richard, but got his first big break when Johnny Vincent left Specialty records to form Ace in 1955, and Smith played piano on Earl King's hit "Those Lonely, Lonely Nights," but Vincent implicitly gave the credit to Fats Domino, who was a rising star at the time.  When Vincent finally did record Smith it was to fill out the flip side of Eddie Bo's "I'm Wise," but then Smith's cut "We Like Mambo" was "mistakenly" credited to Bo.  The next printing corrected the error, but the damage had been done, and Bo even began featuring "We Like Mambo" on his live dates. Smith finally did record "Little Liza Jane" for Ace, which became a local hit.  He gigged around the region, often playing in clubs a hundred or so miles from each other on successive nights.  He hooked up with Shirley and Lee for some roadwork which took him to Atlanta and New York, but his next big break came with "Rockin' Pneumonia and the Boogie-Woogie Flu," which made no. 10 on the R & B charts and no 52 on the pop charts in 1957, which he recorded with his band the Clowns, featuring singer Bobby Marchan.  The band became known for their crazy on-stage stunts which were very popular with audiences. Their next recording "Don't You Just Know It" and "High Blood Pressure" did even better, reaching no. 4 on the R & B charts and no. 9 on the pop charts, selling over 2 million copies in 1958.  But Huey dropped out of the band to come back to New Orleans, being replaced by James Booker,leaving Marchan to lead the band. The event which left Smith most frustrated, however, was Johnny Vincent's giving his song "Sea Cruise" to Frankie Ford to record.  Smith never received more than a few hundred dollars of his promised royalties for this major hit.  After a few more forays in commercial music, which met with only moderate success, Smith withdrew into religion, becoming a Jehovah's Witness.  He tried to make a comeback a few times, but was mistreated, discouraged, had bouts with alcoholism, and finally withdrew definitively from the music scene.

@016 Sykes, Roosevelt\ Sykes Roosevelt (1906-1883) If Jelly Roll Morton and Tony Jackson belonged to the first generation of modern New Orleans piano players, then Roosevelt Sykes-New Orleanian by adoption late in life-and Tuts Washington belonged to the second.  As a blues player he influenced people like Dave "Fat Man" Williams and Dr. John, belonging to that generation who came to artistic maturity before the New Orleans R & B style had begun to coalesce in the late 1940s.  Sykes was born January 31, 1906 on his grandfather's farm in Helena AR, a town on the Mississippi River about 60 miles down river from Memphis, but he grew up in St. Louis.  He absorbed influences from both places, often returning to Helena to hear piano players like Jese Bell, Joe Crump and Baby Sneel, his earliest influences.  In St. Louis he accompanied blues vocalists like St. Louis Jimmy and "Specks" McFadden.  He first recorded in New York in 1929, and settled in Chicago in 1934.  The Windy City was at that time a mecca for the blues, having been the main destination for the great black migration from the Mississippi Delta which had started after World War I. It was through this migration that the "country blues" became the "urban blues," frequently in the same people, as is the case with Sykes, who enjoyed his greatest popularity in the 30s and especially the 40s.  In 1940 he took on Memphis Slim (Peter Chatman) as a student.He enjoyed four decades of recording and performing, using many pseudonyms along the way, including "Dobby Bragg," "Willy Kelly," "Casey Papa Johnson," St. Louis Johnny," and his most famous, "The Honeydripper."  He toured Europe four times between 1961 and 1974. His piano style featured a simple left hand, frequently single repeated notes on the beats, with great rhythmic complexity in his right hand.  He remained harmonically very straightforward, rarely venturing beyond the three standard blues chords, a style with more kinship to the guitarists of the region than to the recorded pianists, although the unrecorded ones were frequently even simpler than that.  He would often sing about half a measure ahead of his accompaniment, a trait that became his trademark. A gentle, spiritual man, Sykes became a regular at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival after settling there in the 70s (he said because he liked the fishing so well), and was known for the risqué lyrics of songs like "Dresser Drawers" and "Ice Cream Freezer."  But he looked to the blues as "a true confession thing," he said, "and people always did like the truth."  His lyrics covered a wide variety of subjects, including love, revenge, life in the city, regrets, as well as sexuality. Sykes died in New Orleans July 11, 1983. 

@017 Torkanowsky, David\ Torkanowsky, David (1956-) David Torkanowsky is such a New Orleans artist that he only admits under duress that he was born in New York City, September 12, 1956.  His father Werner Torkanowsky was playing violin there and teaching at Manhattan school of music.  His mother was a Flamenco artist had been on tour with Carmen Amaya's dance troup. Torkanowsky took his first piano lesson at age three, but disclaims being a prodigy.  His first piano teacher used to rap him on the hand until the young pupil bit him, which ended lessons with that teacher.  He still got his Nestlé's Crunch bar at the end of the lesson, however.  In 1963 he was in second grade when his family moved to New Orleans for his father to assume the baton of the New Orleans Symphony Orchestra. Around age eight Torkanowsky was began visiting Preservation Hall, where he met many local traditional musicians.  He started his own little band around that time.  By the time was 13 he was playing with professionals in traditional gigs.  Walter "Poppie" Lastie was the first important musician to take an interest in him.  Then one day as Torkanowsky was walking by the Maison Bourbon banjo player Danny Barker called him in to fill in for his missing piano player.  Torkanowsky was 16; he earned the union scale $26 during the six-hour gig.   Barker encouraged him to learn the repertoire, and soon Torkanowsky was regularly working in Bourbon Street music clubs.   Besides the Maison Bourbon, he played at Crazy Shirley's across the street and followed Ells Marsalis closely.  Marsalis had a regular gig at Lu and Charlie's, where Torkanowsky was admitted, though underage.   He often helped the senior player set up his Rhodes electric piano. Torkanowsky graduated high school in 1974 and went to Boston to study at the Berkelee College of Music.  He stayed there just two years, then left to take a gig on Cape Cod with Walter and David Lastie, Scott Hill, Walter Flemming, and T-Man Etienne.  While at Berkelee he encouraged certain fellow musicians to come down to New Orleans, among them pianist Mike Pellera and saxophonist Tony Dagradi.  Soon after returning to New Orleans he formed a band with Dagradi called The Astral Project (1978), which still performs today.  Torkanowsky absorbed his New Orleans R & B piano style from Dr. John recordings as well as personal friendship with James Booker and Eddie Bo.  In 1980 he managed Al Hirt's big band and has performed with an all-star list of artists and groups, including Boz Scaggs, Regina Belle, Allen Toussaint, Dr. John, The Meters, Terri Lyne Carrington, Nat Adderly, Eddie Haris, Larry Coryell, Gladys Knight, Alvin Batiste, Joe Henderson, Maria Muldair, Woody Shaw, and John Moony.  Since 1990 he has served as vocalist Dianne Reeves touring pianist and recorded with her on Art and Survival  (EMI).  He is also on Johnny Adams Good Morning Heartache  (Rounder),  Alvin "Red" Tyler's two albums Heritage  and Graciously,  Tony Dagradi's Dreams of Love  (Rounder) and Lunar Eclipse (Grammavision),  and his own CD Steppin' Out  (Rounder, 1989).  In 1990 he maintained a residence in Los Angeles, where Al Kooper arranged for him to do the music for a season of NBC's Crime Story.

@018 Toussaint, Allen\ Toussaint Allen (1938-) Composer, pianist, producer Allen Toussaint was born January 14, 1938 in New Orleans, growing up in the Gert Town neighborhood near the historic Lincoln Park (the African-American amusement park where Buddy Bolden played around the turn of the century, now occupied by a gasoline station on Carrollton Avenue).   He manifested his musical interests at age 7 when he began playing on his sister's piano.  Later he was deeply influenced by Henry Roeland ("Roy") Byrd, AKA Professor Longhair, whom he later dubbed "the Bach of Rock."  He dropped out of school to tour with Shirley and Lee, replacing Huey "Piano" Smith and later became a regular at the Dew Drop Inn.Toussaint began hanging around Cosimo Matassa's studio in the early 1950s, and Dave Bartholomew finally hired him to play backing tracks for Fats Domino's "I Want to Know" and "Young School Girl," among others.  He was soon recognized for his arranging talents, especially on the Lee Allen hit "Walking for Mr. Lee" in 1958.  He made his own LP that year for RCA, The Wild Sounds of New Orleans,  recording the entire album in two days, including "Java," which turned out to be a hit for Al Hirt in 1963. He became the principal producer for the Minit label, owned by Joe Banashak and Larry Mckinley in 1960, and recorded Jesse Hill's "Ooo Poo Pah Do" which reached no. 3 on the R & B charts and no. 30 on the pop charts that year; and Ernie K-Doe's "Mother-in-Law," which reached no. 1 on both charts in 1961.  He also recognized the talents of Benny Spellman and produced Spellman's hit "Lipstick Traces" in 1962.   When Joe Banashak became dissatisfied with his distributor he left Imperial and founded Instant records, putting Toussaint in again as head producer.  There Toussaint produced Chris Kenner's "I Like It Like That" which reached no. 2 on both R& B and pop charts in 1961. Toussaint was drafted in 1963 and got out in 1965, when he was courted by several labels, but chose instead to form a partnership with Marshal Sehorn, originally from Charlotte, NC, and who had produced Wilbert Harrison's "Kansas City" which had reached no. one on both R & B and pop charts in 1959, as well as Lee Dorsey's "Yah-Yah" (no. 1 on R & B, no. 7 on pop in 1961) in 1961.  Toussaint and Sehorn opened Seasaint Studio together in 1972.  There he produced more hits with Lee Dorsey and also recorded the Meters, the Neville Brothers, Dr. John (Mac Rebennack), LaBelle, Joe Cockers and many others, doing the arrangements for Paul Simon's album Rhymin' Simon.  Toussaint's own album activity, confined to that period, include Toussaint  in 1971 on Tiffany; Life, Love and Faith  in 1972;  and Southern Nights  in 1975 on Reprise and Motion  in 1978 on Warner Brothers.  His compositions have been recorded by the Oak Ridge Boys, Devo, Little Feat, Boss Scaggs, Bonnie Raitt and many others.

@019 Washington, Tuts\ Washington, Tuts (1907-1984) Isadore "Tuts" Washington, Jr. was born in New Orleans January 24, 1907.  He considered himself a creole; his great-grandfather was an Indian, and Tuts claimed he had gotten his skin color.  Washington was raised by his aunt after his mother died when he was six, and first began to play on his aunt's piano when he was ten, having been exposed to the rich musical life of New Orleans, where on weekends bands would compete on street corners, and where every wake had a band, as he told Jeff Hannusch (see BIBLIOGRAPHY).  He began by teaching himself the blues, listening from the outside to the many players holding forth in the clubs.  He started playing professionally in a movie theater for the silent films and at fish fries-parties held by individual families to raise expense money, where musicians ate for free and got paid a few dollars (see Dave "Fat Man" Williams biography). Washington quit school after the sixth grade and worked as a shoe-shine boy, very content with the $7/week he was making.  He played with a number of the Dixieland bands, including those led by Kid Rena and Kid Punch, and he figured out that he had to play more than the blues if he didn't want to be just one more in the legion of barrelhouse piano players. During the 1920s Washington played in "Black Storyville," a red light district on Perdido Street, now mostly parking lots in the central business district.  Storyville had been closed in 1917.  There he'd run into the blues players who were the mainstay of solo piano in the black brothels, men like Hezekiah, Fats Pichon, Burnell Santiago, Kid Stormy Weather, Drive 'Em Down, Little Brother Montgomery and "Black" Merineaux.  Sometimes three of four of them would try to "buck" each other, competing to see who was best, taking turns on one piano.  If a place was raided, Washington would have to escape quickly, since he was still underage.  His aunt frequently beat him on suspicion of hanging out at the whorehouses.  At that time his main musical influence was Joseph Louis "Red" Cayou (1905-1947), who was generally acknowledged as the best of the local piano players.  According to Washington, he could run any player off the piano by simply entering the room.  Washington copied his left hand technique from Cayou, who left New Orleans for Oakland, CA around 1925, and died in a car crash. At age 18 Washington was sent to a teacher, but he quit after one lesson, since the teacher felt he couldn't teach the boy anything.  He continued to learn by ear.During the 1930s Washington lived well playing mostly in black-run speakeasies and brothels on South Rampart Street-where he was well-treated by the women who worked there-and with bands on Bourbon Street, such as those run by Kid Sheik, Alton Purnel and Thomas Jefferson.  It was also during this time that Washington met the young Roy Byrd (aka Professor Longhair), himself underage, who came the South Rampart Street clubs to listen to him. Throughout the 1940s Washington worked in and around New Orleans, often with vocalist Smiley Lewis (Overton Lemons), whom he had met while he was playing with Jefferson during the previous decade.  In 1948 Washington was on Lewis's record "Turn On Your Volume" and "Here Comes Smiley" on Deluxe, and they became a popular group around town, playing at places such as The Gypsy Tea Room, the El Morocco and the Dew Drop Inn.  Washington supplied Lewis with a number of his songs, many of which never gave Washington credit, including "Tee-Nah-Nah," whose popularity became the basis for their touring around the region.  Washington broke with Lewis in 1951 and joined Papa Celestin's Dixieland Band, replacing Jeanette Kimball-his cousin-on piano, playing mostly at the Paddock Lounge on Bourbon Street.  He gave the job back to Kimball when she asked for it and took a resort job in Grand Isle, LA with Andrew Anderson. Washington knew Fats Domino and James Booker coming up.  He would visit Booker's house when Booker was young and admired the prodigy, who in turn learned what he could from Washington.  They remained friends, and it saddened Washington to see Booker's problems with narcotics and the law. In 1979 Washington participated with Allen Toussaint and Professor Longhair in a video made by Stevenson Palfi called Pianists Rarely Ever Play Together.   The idea was to show three generations of piano players.  Professor Longhair died before the final shooting, so the video consists mostly of rehearsals, in which the piano players interact with each other informally. Washington began a two-year solo stint at the Bayou Bar of the Pontchartrain Hotel in 1980 playing mostly standards with an occasional boogie-woogie.  In March, 1983 he finally made his first recording New Orleans Piano Professor  on Rounder, which he was proud of, and which achieved success locally.  He died while performing at the New Orleans World's Fair in August, 1984.

@020 Williams, Dave " Fat Man" \ Williams, Dave "Fat Man" (1920-1982) A central participant in the tradition of neighborhood music-based parties which served as a coherent force in the New Orleans African-American community, Williams was born August 20, 1920, into a musical family.  His mother played good piano and was a cousin of Joseph "Cié" Frazier, who had played drums with A. J. Piron, John Robichaux and Papa Celestin.  By marriage Williams was related to the Marreros and the Barnes musical families (Paul Barnes was in the original Tuxedo Jazz Band and later toured with King Oliver). At age 12 Williams was escorted to gigs by men like Paul Barbarin and Ulysses Jean, who would assure his mother that they'd take care of him.  He played the "nickel parties," where admission, ice cream, pies, etc. cost a nickel on down.  The parties were geared to children, but homemade alcohol was sold under cover-it was the last years of Prohibition.  He'd make 75¢ to a dollar a week, which would mostly go to his mother.  Williams remembered the musical activity of his native 7th Ward, blues piano players like Minne Jack and Buckwheat, whom he learned from, and he sang about them in one of his signature tunes, the "Back O' Town Blues:"  Well, they call these blues/The way Back O' Town blues,/Way back in Boscoville, Paillet Lane,/Gert Town, Lovers Lane." "Back 'o town" referred to the location of the neighborhoods which began with Tremé on the other side of N. Rampart Street from the French Quarter, and extended all the way to Lake Pontchartrain. Williams frequently played at the Depression era private money-raising gatherings known in New Orleans as "Saturday night fish fries," comparable to rent parties in the big cities of the north.   A family would cook up a meal of fried fish and potato salad and sell it to neighbors, hanging a red kerosene lantern on their gate as an invitational sign.  Louis Jordan immortalized the institution in his song of that name:

	Have you ever been down to New Or-leens?
	Then you can understand just what I mean.
	All through the week it's quiet as a mouse,
	But on Saturday night they go from house to house.
	You don't have to pay no main admission
	If you're a cook or a waiter or a good musician
	If you happen to be just passin' by
	Stop in at the Saturday Night Fish Fry.

Williams was also a regular at the Black fraternal social organizations, playing often at the old Perseverance Hall, which is now part of Armstrong Park in the back 'o town Tremé district.  Families would specialize in particular consumables-red beans, ham sandwiches, or homemade wine or beer-and the musicians would have jam sessions, particularly on "blue Mondays," which was most musicians' night off.  In the army from 1941 to 1948, Williams received his first formal musical training when he got out and began studying on the G. I bill.  From then on he played at all the legendary New Orleans music clubs: the Caledonia, the Hideaway, the Dew Drop Inn (with Joe Turner and Lloyd Price), the Pelican Club and the Club Desire in the Ninth Ward (home of Fats Domino) as well as all the Bourbon Street clubs. Williams travelled and performed regularly with Kid Thomas Valentine's band, frequently at Perservation Hall and lived comfortably off his piano playing and songs reminiscent of his youth.  His song ideas often came to him while he slept, he said.   In 1974 he made his only LP I Ate Up the Apple Tree , consisting of a live session at Lu and Charlie's and one from 1963.  The record on the New Orleans label was produced by English emigree trumpeter Clive Wilson, a New Orleans regular since 1964.  It well displays Williams simple, percussive blues style, which harkened back to barrelhouse days, and his heartfelt lyrics. Williams died March 12, 1982.
@021 A. New Orleans Piano\ The Origins of New Orleans Piano. New Orleans piano styles constitute an important part of the contribution New Orleans has made to American music.  Broadly, this contribution can be divided into two historical moments:  the first one corresponds to the birth and development of early jazz and is dominated by Jelly Roll Morton.  It was highly influence by ragtime, but it was much more than ragtime.  Morton added a shuffling swing rhythm to ragtime's syncopation and created a powerful melodic idiom which still seems fresh today.  Listen to Tom McDermott's renditions of famous Morton tunes in The New Orleans Pianist, as well as to Joel Simpson's rendering of a note-for-note transcription of Morton's version of Scott Joplin's "Maple Leaf Rag."   This latter example when compared to the published Joplin version, also included here, graphically shows Morton's rhythmic and contrapuntal innovations in the context of the musical fashion of his day, which was solidly ragtime.   	Morton also tried to capture the roles of the different instruments of the jazz band in his solo piano playing:  the octave melodies representing trumpet lines, the tenor octaves the trombones, the clarinet-like passage work in the right hand, as well as the rest of the rhythm section in activity by both hands.  Few of the people he influenced recorded in his day.  Tuts Washington mentions one of them, Joseph Louis "Red" Cayou, who was active in New Orleans in the early 1920s.  Today there are a number of Jelly Roll Morton specialists who attempt to preserve his style the way he played it, notably Butch Thompson, Bob Greene, James Dapogny, and our own Tom McDermott.
	The second historical moment of New Orleans piano comes at the end of 1940s when Roy Byrd, aka Professor Longhair put Latin rhythms together with a blues shuffle. His first recording was in 1949 of "Mardi Gras in New Orleans" and "She Ain't Got No Hair."  (Band leader Dave Bartholomew was making the same connection between the shuffle and Latin rhythms in an ensemble context around the same time.)  At that time there was no body of popular dance music associated with Mardi Gras.  Byrd both corrected that and founded a style in a single song.  His innovation represented a significant departure from the boogie-woogie based blues which had dominated the pop blues scene since the 1920s, in New Orleans and everywhere else (see BIOGRAPHIES of Roosevelt Sykes and Dave "Fat Man" Williams).
	Latin music, particularly from Cuba, had been seeping into American popular music since the 1920s, and it became a torrent during the 40s.  Byrd is said to have absorbed it while working on WPA projects throughout Louisiana in 1937.  Ironically, it was Morton who had noticed the particular "Spanish tinge" in New Orleans music much earlier.  None of this is mysterious if looked at from the perspective of the diffusion of African style musics in the New World. 
	The cultural mixture found in New Orleans had been unique in North American since the 18th century.  The city absorbed a richer and more extensive dose of African musical traditions than anywhere else in the US, and it is the only US city where French and Spanish cultures had established themselves.   Music in these European cultures had a much broader and more pervasive role than in English culture, which held sway throughout the rest of the US during the 18th and 19th centuries before the masses of immigrants from central and Eastern Europe and elsewhere arrived.  And even if particular African musics hadn't survived in New Orleans, African styles of music making and the importance of music as part of life definitely had, making New Orleans unique both for the diversity of musical traditions found there and the ease with which musicians absorbed new musical idioms.
	Elsewhere in the Americas outside the US Africans, originally imported as slaves, constituted a much greater proportion of the population and did conserve much more of their music-cultural heritage than they did in the US.  Latin-American music sounds like it does because it is much more heavily African influenced.  New Orleans, with its constant flow of immigrants from Latin America and its role as a major trading port with the Caribbean and South America, was the logical place for Latin music to have an impact.
	Jazz had been the result of the combination of European and African traditions of music making with a certain amount of Spanish-style syncopation, as discerned by Morton.  Latin-based music was integrated to an even greater degree in the second wave of musical innovation to come out of New Orleans, based on the creation of a new composite rhythm which transformed boogie-woogie style blues, with its repetitive eighth-note triplet left hand rhythm, into what came to be known as rhythm and blues, a term which was the designation used by record company owners for popular music which appealed to the African-American market.  Although the strictly shuffle rhythms remained a vital force in this music, the new hybrid of shuffle-rumba or shuffle-mambo, which had been created by Professor Longhair became the most exciting new current in the music and by the mid-fifties had filtered through to rock 'n' roll, a term coined by disk jockey Alan Freed for the blues-based music marketed to white record buyers.  By the mid-fiftiesk, even though Billboard  maintained separate charts for the R & B and the pop (or rock 'n' roll) markets, enough tunes did well on both charts to argue for a expansion of national popular tastes into a single main market embracing a range of styles. 
	So the New Orleans connection was essential to the development of both R & B and rock 'n' roll.  Although it was a music that had been largely developed on the piano, what sold records were the vocals, so it wasn't until much later that interest began to spread in the New Orleans R & B piano style.  There is a historical reason for this.  Professor Longhair had developed his highly original piano style by the 50s and people like James Booker, Tommy Ridgely, Allen Toussaint and Eddie Bo had begun to adopt it themselves.  But just as the style was forming its own identity around a community of players musical fashion shifted away.  The Beatles and other British rock groups transformed R & B/rock 'n' roll in the 1960s, widening it out from the blues, broadening its themes to embrace social protest, drugs, and other preoccupations of the pop culture.  The result was that New Orleans flavored music lost market share and the fortunes of its purveyors went into decline.  This lasted until the early to mid-70s when Professor Longhair was rediscovered, showcased at the New Orleans Jazz Festival in 1971, with Dr. John contributing to the revival interest in the city with his albums Gris-Gris  in 1967 and Gumbo  in 1972.   
	New Orleans music began to take on new life both as a special province of rock music and as a valued part of the local culture of the city.  The stars of the New Orleans piano style did well, putting out albums and going on European tours (see their BIOGRAPHIES in this program).  More and more pianists in and around New Orleans studied the licks and rhythmic patterns of Professor Longhair, James Booker and Dr. John, to the point that some of them became commonplaces.  Then in 1985 Homespun Tapes put out an audiocassette series with a book of transcriptions with Dr. John talking about and demonstrating "New Orleans Piano and the Roots of Rock;"  New Orleans R & B piano had become an identifiable branch of jazz/rock piano.

@022 A.. Bibliography\Bibliography for The New Orleans Pianist.

Broven, John.  Rhythm and Blues in New Orleans (Gretna, LA: Pelican Publishing Company, 1978).  Documents the R & B scene through the early 70s by sorting through the complex web of independent record label history in New Orleans.

Berry, Jason, Jonathan Foose and Tad Jones. Up from the Cradle of Jazz: New Orleans Music Since World War II. (Athens, GA: University of Georga Press, 1986).  Wide ranging account of the broad variety of popular music in New Orleans since the beginning of the New Orleans R & B sound.  Much material based on interviews.  Amply illustrated, including excellent on-the-scene photos by Mike Smith.

Clark, Donald, ed. Penguin Encyclopedia of Popular Music.  (London and New York: Penguin, 1989).  Concise one-volume work.

Dapogny, James.  Ferdinand "Jelly Roll" Morton: The Collected Piano Music  (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press and New York: G. Schirmer, 1982).  Definitive transcriptions of Morton's major works from the best recordings; with generous documentation.

Dr. John (Mac Rebennack). Dr. John the Night Tripper Teaches New Orleans Piano and the Roots of Rock. (Woodstock, NY:  Homespun Tapes, 1985).  Five audiocassettes featuring Dr. John talking and demonstrating many aspects of the New Orleans R & B style.  Also includes cassette of Dr. John Plays Mac Rebennack.

Hannusch, Jeff.  I Hear You Knockin':  the Sound of New Orleans Rhythm and Blues. (Ville Platte, LA: Swallow Press, 1985).  A lively history of the subject through the biographies of the artists and producers of the music, much of the material taken from interviews.

Kernfield, Barry, ed. The New Grove Dictionary of Jazz. (New York: Grove Dictionaries of Music, 1988).   Generous thoughtful articles; takes up where Leonard Feather's encyclopedias left off. 

Larkin, Colin, ed.  The Guiness Encyclopedia of Popular Music.  (Chester, CT: New England Publishing, 1992).  In four volumes.  Very useful.

Liechtenstein, Grace and Laura Dankner.  Musical Gumbo: The Music of New Orleans  (New York: W. W. Norton, 1993).  Lively survey of New Orleans music briefly reviewing the beginnings, offering an overview of the birth and progress of New Orleans jazz, reviewing the history of R & B and bringing it up to date, and surveying the Cajun music and contemporary jazz scene as well.  

Roberts, John Storm. Black Music of Two Worlds  (Tivoli, NY: Original Music, 1972).  Fascinating study of the persistence of African traditions in New World music.

Small, Christopher.  Music of the Common Tongue: Survival and Celebration in Afro-American Music.  (New York: Riverrun Press; London: John Calder, 1987).  Penetrating sociocultural analysis of music in African societies and how those traditions have survived and been transformed in the New World. 
@
