@001 Armstrong ,Lil Hardin \ Armstrong ,Lil Hardin(1898-1971) .Although not from New Orleans Lil Hardin Armstrong exercised a strong influence on Louis Armstrong and was a driving force in traditional jazz throughout her life. Born in Memphis on February 3, 1898, she studied music at Fisk University and moved to Chicago in 1917, where she worked as a song plugger.  She played with New Orleans clarinetist Freddie Keppard and led her own band at the club Dreamland around 1920 before joining King Oliver's Creole Jazz Band in 1921. There she met Louis Armstrong, whom she married in 1924, and encouraged him to leave Oliver's band for that of Fletcher Henderson the same year.  The following year Louis joined the group his wife was by then leading in Chicago.  She wrote songs for Armstrong's recording bands, including his Hot Five (which also recorded as Lil's Hot Shots) and Hot Seven and from 1925-1927 played and sang on many of the cuts.  Perhaps her most famous composition was "Struttin' with Some Barbecue" which became a staple of the traditional jazz repertoire. In 1926 she organized a recording group for Columbia called the New Orleans Wanderers and then resumed her studies, leading to a teacher's diploma from the Chicago Musical College in 1928 and a graduate degree from the New York College of Music in 1929.  While pursuing these studies she also toured with Freddie Keppard and recorded with Johnny Dodds.During the 1930s she led a number of bands in Chicago and New York, including an all female ensemble and appeared as a soloist in two revues.  She separated from Louis Armstrong in 1931, and the divorced in 1938.  After that she worked as a session pianist for Decca in New York, recording with a number of notable musicians, including Henry "Red" Allen. She returned to Chicago in the 1940s and continued to write, perform and record music.  She occasionally went on concert tours, including one to Europe in 1952.  She died on August 27, 1971, during a concert tribute to her former husband Louis, who had died 32 days earlier. Lil Hardin Armstrong had a remarkable talent for organization, a deep insight into her music and driving ambition.  She was an important impetus in launching Louis's career, and thus had an effect on the history of jazz.  Her playing is marked by its strong rhythmic drive which propels any group she is in. 

@002 Blake, Eubie \ Blake, Eubie(1883-1983) In the last decade of his life Eubie Blake was a frequent visitor to New Orleans, playing at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival several years in a row.  Music lovers in the city adopted him as one of their sentimental favorites, even though he lived in Brooklyn and was born James Hubert Blake in Baltimore (February 7, 1883).New Orleans jazz historian Al Rose wrote Blake's biography (Eubie Blake,  Shirmer-Macmillan, 1979).  Blake's "Charleston Rag," which was his first piano rag and originally titled "Sounds of Africa" is included here as an illustration of the connection between Blake's more bravado style of ragtime and Jelly Roll Morton's  early jazz piano.  Though lacking Morton's swing rhythm and contrapuntal bassline figures, it uses a number of dramatic devices which Morton used, notably dramatic  breaks, interludes, changes of register and the shout chorus principle in the last strain in which a melody is repeated over and over to build tension.   It was Blake's first piano rag, composed in 1899 when he was just 17 years old. Blake was the son of slaves.  His parents bought him a home organ when he was six years old and arranged for lessons.  He later studied with Llewelyn Wilson.  Blake got his first job at age 15 in a Baltimore brothel.  He would have to sneak out a second storey window, taking his long pants with him to go to work.  His parents eventually found out when a neighbor recognized his style while passing the establishment, and they put an end to that job. In 1915 he began a long-lasting collaboration with Noble Sissle both as performers and as song writers.  They had an immediate success with their song "It's All Your Fault," which was performed by Sophie Tucker.  Blake and Sissle next went to New York city where they teamed up with James Reese Europe's very popular Society Orchestra, which was very active during World War I.  After the war they formed the Dixie Duo, a vaudeville act.  Their biggest success together, however, was the all-black Broadway musical Shuffle Along,  which opened in 1921 and ran for 14 months.  It was the first time African-Americans had been presented on the Broadway stage in romantic, non-subservient, roles.During the rest of that decade and the following one Blake collaborated with a number of lyricists including Sissle and wrote for several Broadway and London shows.  His most popular songs, "I'm Just Wild About Harry," and "Memories of You," remain standards today.  Many of his popular songs display ragtime-like syncopation which was so prevalent in the popular songs coming out of Tin Pan Alley from 1900 to 1920.  Throughout all this Blake's mother understood neither his music nor the scope of his success; she had always wanted him to remain playing religious music.During World War II Blake served as music director for touring USO productions.  He retired in 1946 to study composition and began notating many of his early works.  He had begun to record in 1917 as a soloist, both on piano rolls (issued as LPs on the Biograph label in 1973, BLP-1011Q and BOP-1012Q) and with his orchestra into the 1930s.  He rode the crest of the ragtime revival in the 1950s, receiving attention as the top ragtime player in the US, and he began recording again in 1969 with the album The Eighty-Six Years of Eubie Blake.   In 1972 he established his own publishing company and the next year began cutting piano rolls again.  His popularity soared.  He appeared frequently on television and at jazz festivals around the world, receiving awards wherever he went.  In  1978 the Broadway show Eubie  celebrated his life and works.  There was a huge celebration for his 100th birthday, attended by numerous celebrities, including Ed Koch, the mayor of New York.  Blake listened to the proceedings from his bed through a phone hookup.  He died five days later on February 12, 1983.  Throughout his life Blake never accepted the principle of an improvised jazz chorus which completely departed from the melody.  He believed that the original melody should always be audible, and that the ingenuity of the performer showed in how he could embellish and transform it.  This conviction kept Blake tied to the pre-Armstrong age of jazz.

@003 Bo, Eddie \ Bo, Eddie (1937-) Born Edwin Bocage on September 20, 1937, he came from a family of musicians, his father's side coming from across the Mississippi river in Algiers.  His mother was a good blues player, frequently playing at the Saturday night fish fries, which were private money-raising parties in the African-American neighborhoods during the 1930s (cf. Dave "Fat Man" Williams biography).  Bo remembered that the predominant style at those fish fries was barrelhouse piano, and a more or less collective musical saga of drugs, prostitution and prison called "The Junker(s)."  Pianists would take turns singing and playing the thing to death.  Mac Rebennack recalled that it was sung at the state prison farm at Angola to a rhythm which became known as "the jailbird beat." From 1958 to 1964 Bo worked with an R & B band with the Lastie brothers Walter and David and guitarist Irving Bannister, touring as the show band for Amos Milburn, Charles Brown, Little Willie John and Ruth Brown.   This solidified Bo's talent as a stage performer and also exposed him to other influences from jazz piano, such as George Shearing, Oscar Peterson and Art Tatum.  He tried to combine this with what he had learned from Professor Longhair, whose style he had absorbed from listening to him from outside the Caledonia club, too young to be let in.Bo recorded for most of the local New Orleans labels during the 50s and 60s, but he was most loyal to Joe Ruffino at Ric Records.  In 1959 Etta James recorded his tune  "Dearest Darling," and it stayed high on the R & B charts for 17 weeks.  During this time his style was often associated with that of Huey "Piano" Smith (cf.).  Both of them put out songs about the cartoon character Popeye in 1962, which blossomed into a dance fad which swept the country.	During the early 70s Bo retired from performing to concentrate on house renovation.  He established a construction company and saved the money he earned there to make more recordings. With his singer wife Toni he opened a club, El Grande, in 1979 and began to record, making his first LP Another Side of Eddie Bo  that year.   It combined jazz, disco and pop in solid arrangements.  The following year he closed the club and put out a second and better LP Watch for the Coming  on his own Eboville label, with Toni on vocals and Guitar Slim, Jr. on guitar.  Bo's style is an eclectic one, combining bebop licks and Thelonius Monk quotations with Professor Longhair-style rumba rhythms and rich chords and syncopations.   He continues to be an active player around New Orleans. 

@004 Booker, James \ Booker, James (1939-1983) James Carroll Booker, III was born at Charity Hospital in New Orleans on December 17, 1939. His father, J. C. Booker, Jr. was a Baptist preacher and pianist (and purportedly the composer of the  Booker standard "Pop's Dilemma."   See versions of this tune by Jon Cleary and Tom McDermott in THE NEW ORLEANS PIANIST).  As a young child, Booker was sent to nearby Bay St. Louis to be raised by his aunt and there showed an interest in music at age 6, when he began taking piano lessons.  He learned fast, and played well enough to be considered a child prodigy, studying classical music with his teacher, but more attracted to the blues. Tragedy struck Booker at age ten:  he was hit by a speeding ambulance, which fractured his leg.  This affected his walk for the rest of his life and introduced him to morphine as a pain-killer, which eventually led to a debilitating drug habit. When Booker's father died in 1953 he moved back to New Orleans to live with his mother, who enrolled him in Xavier Preparatory School.  There he excelled in math, Spanish and music.  Through his older sister Betty Jean, he got his first professional job playing blues and gospel on a regular Sunday program over radio station WMRY.  He formed his first group, Booker Boy and the Rhythmaires, which included Art Neville, who joined him on the radio.  Also around that time he came under the influence of pianist Tuts Washington, whom he heard during the older pianist's visits to his mother house, as well as in clubs, where he had to sneak in, since he was underage.  Pianist Edward Frank introduced him to Dave Bartholomew, who recorded two tunes of Booker's, "Thinking about My Baby" and "Doing the Hambone" on Imperial.  They didn't sell well, but they got Booker into the recording business at age 14.   According to Cosimo Matassa, who owned the studio, Bartholomew would sometimes use Booker to fill in piano tracks for Fats Domino when Fats was out of town, with Fats filling in the vocals when he came back.In 1957 Booker graduated from Xavier Prep and joined Joe Tex's band, travelling around the southern club circuit, including appearances in Texas, Arkansas and Georgia.  When Ace Records signed Tex, Booker came on board too, and began recording on the Hammond organ.  He soon achieved local prominence as an organist, playing as many as three regular gigs on organ per week. In 1958 Booker cut an instrumental on Ace including "Teenage Rock" and "Open the Door," but when label owner Johnny Vincent dubbed Joe Tex's voice over "Open the Door" Booker was upset and managed to get out of his 3-year contract with Ace by claiming his mother had signed for him when he was underage.   It was at this time that Booker began to become involved with hard drugs, which he later talked about openly, admitting that he played music primarily to earn money for dope. The drugs began to affect his behavior as a musician, and some began to lose patience with him. In 1959 Booker enrolled at Southern University in Baton Rouge, hoping that his college studies would help him overcome his drug habit.  He dropped out of school two months short of graduation in order to play organ in an R & B band led by Dee Clark and Phil Upchurch.  The band broke up soon afterward in Houston and the organ was sold to New Orleans club owner Don Robey, who also owned Peacock records.  Booker worked a few gigs at the Golden Peacock, Robey's club, and recorded two instrumental sides for him, "Gonzo" and "Cool Turkey" both references to the drug culture ("Gonzo" was the name of the main character in the movie The Pusher ).   The record made number 10 on Billboard's  R & B chart and 43 on the pop chart in December 1960, but even though Booker recorded  five more sides for Robey, they couldn't duplicate their first success.  Booker left Peacock in 1962. Booker's drug problem worstened.  He wandered around among New Orleans, Los Angeles, Las Vegas and New York, and managed to play on Lloyd Price's hit "Misty" in 1962, with Aretha Franklin on "So Swell When You're Well," and on Fats Domino's Fats Is Back  album on Reprise, again sounding like Fats.  In 1970 he was arrested outside the Dew Drop Inn in New Orleans for herion possession and sentenced to two years at the state penitentiary in Angola.  Booker served six months before being paroled. After finding it slow in New Orleans, Booker broke parole and headed for New York, where he recorded with Maria Muldaur, Ringo Starr (on Beaucoup of Blues ), Jerry Garcia, and the Doobie Brothers.  Later in Los Angeles he recorded with Charles Brown and with T-Bone Walker (his last album, Very Rare  on Warner Brothers). Booker returned to New Orleans in 1975, his legal problems having been straightened out, but wearing a patch over his left eye.  He told various stories how he lost his eye, but admitted to friends that it was through the use of a dirty syringe.  It was that same year that he made his first flamboyant appearance at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, which turned out to be auspicious.  German promoter/musicologist Norbert Hess heard him and brought him to the 1975 Berlin Rhythm and Blues Festival, which led to other European appearances. Upon returning to the US he recorded his Junco Partner  album, one of the three along with Classified  and Piano Prince of New Orleans,  which represent Booker's entire recorded legacy as a mature performer.  Junco Partner  was released on the British label Island, and it led to more European touring in England and Germany in 1976. Back in Europe the following year, Booker recorded Piano Prince of New Orleans  as a live album in Zurich, which won the Grand Prix du Disque de Jazz award; then in 1978 he performed at the Monteux Jazz Festival in Switzerland.  That turned out to be his last trip to Europe. Returning to New Orleans Booker turned inward emotionally, went through a series of managers, exhibited very erratic behavior, leaving the stage in mid-set, vomitting on the piano, and frequently checking into the Charity Hospital psychiatric ward. He recorded one more album, this one in 1982 for Rounder, but it almost didn't happen. Booker's health was terrible; the session was rescheduled several times.  The first two days of studio time were wasted with Booker's childish antics, but on the third day Booker made good, recording more than enough material for the album, although he stopped in the middle of a powerful rendition of "Big Chief" with the tape rolling to run to bank to cash his check.  The he disappeared, only to turn up at the New Orleans House of Detention.  His manager John Parsons bailed him out, and he played at Parson's club The Maple Leaf as brilliantly as ever.  Things went better for a while, but Booker returned to drinking the following summer.  He took up cocaine again that fall.  His behavior became erratic again and he died of an overdose on November 8, 1983, less than a month short of his 44th birthday.

@005 Butler, Henry \ Butler, Henry (1948-) Born in New Orleans in 1948 Butler, who was rendered totally blind by an infantile eye disease at age two months, was attracted to the piano as a young child.  He began receiving formal musical training at the Louisiana State School for the Blind in Baton Rouge at age 8.  Throughout his youth and adolescence he absorbed the piano styles of New Orleans R & B from Professor Longhair, James Booker, Tommy Ridgely and Eddie Bo as well as involvement in gospel accompaniment.  He broadened his interest to include mainstream jazz while studying for his B. A. in voice at Southern University in Baton Rouge under the tutelage of clarinetist, composer, recording artist Alvin Batiste.  Batiste introduced Butler to the jazz legacy of John Coltrane, Charlie Parker, Bud Powell and Art Tatum, but he also pointed him in the direction of music from folk cultures of Africa, the Caribbean and South America, what 20 years later came to be called "world music." Butler became an active performer, playing his own multi-cultural mix of jazz, New Orleans R & B and musics of the world.  He earned a Masters in vocal music from Michigan State and received grants from the National Endowment of the Arts to study with pianists Roland Hanna and George Duke and with saxophonist Cannonball Adderly; he also studied privately with Harold Mabern. Back in New Orleans in 1974 he continued to absorb his hometown influences.  From 1976 to '78 he taught at the New Orleans Center for the Creative Arts, the arts high school which spawned the Marsalis brothers, Donald Harrison, Terrence Blanchard, and Harry Connick, Jr.   He also spent some time with Professor Longhair, learning Fess's idiosyncratic licks and tricks.  This influence added to the study of contemporary jazz pianists like McCoy Tyner, Chick Corea and Keith Jarrett, as well as twentieth century composers Debussy and Bartòk forged Butler's broad stylistic approach to the keyboard.  It is an approach deeply rooted in a solid, propulsive, highly nuanced sense of rhythm, complete hand independence, solid mastery of jazz and blues idioms from the entire century's history of the genres, lightening fast technique, and excellent taste. Butler moved to Los Angeles in 1980 where he gigged in local restaurants, clubs and on the radio.  He worked as a composer, arranger and actor on director Oz Scott's docudrama Dreamland  and as a talent development consultant for Motown and the Stevie Wonder Organization.  After sitting in with bassist Charlie Haden and drummer Billy Higgins at the Comeback Inn in Venice in 1984, however, he received an offer to record for MCA, resulting in his major release, Fivin' Around, which Billboard considered one of the top ten jazz albums of 1986. Butler moved to Brooklyn and gigged around New York from 1986 to 1990, and making his second CD for MCA, The Village,  in 1987.   He signed with Windham Hill in 1989 and recorded a live CD at Tipitina's in New Orleans called Orleans Inspiration, which was released in 1990.  Also that year he began teaching music at Eastern Illinois University in Charleston, Illinois. Butler's fourth album, Blues and More,  co-produced by George Winston on Windham Hill, is a combination of New Orleans style piano and sophisticated world-beat music. He considers it his best product and has recorded a second volume.  Some of the tunes from Blues and More  and Orleans Inspiration  appear in THE NEW ORLEANS PIANIST.

@006 Cleary, Jon \ Cleary, Jon (1962-) Born in 1962 in London into a musical family, Cleary started playing guitar at 5.  He grew up hearing a mixture of music at home: soul, Dixieland, New Orleans jazz, New Orleans rhythm and blues, rock and roll and old English music hall melodies.  He started playing in bands at 11, and at 15 joined English slide guitarist Roger Hubbard.  Cleary left England for New Orleans at 17 and spent a few years there learning, listening to and studying New Orleans piano players.  He put together a six-piece band playing New Orleans R & B funk in London, and after two years returned to New Orleans and began playing with Walter "Wolfman" Washington, Johnny Adams, Earl King, Snooks Eaglin, and occasional local spot gigs with such local luminaries as Ernie K-Doe, Jessie Hill, Tommy Ridgely and Eddie Bo.  Over the past five years Cleary has appeared at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, the Havana Jazz Festival, Kobe/New Orleans Jazz Festival in Japan, Dublin Blues Festival, Soho Jazz Fest (London), and others in Australia, Hong Kong, Switzerland, Austria and elsewhere.  As leader he has recorded Alligator Lips and Dirty Rice  on Ace Records.   As sideman he is on Perfect Companion with Mighty Sam McLain (Orleans), That's Where It's At  with the Holmes Brothers (Rounder), Walking a Tightrope  with Johnny Adams (Rounder), Live at Tipitina  (compilation) (Tipitina Records), Late Last Night  (Rounder) and Testimony  (Domino) both with John Mooney.

@007 Connick, Jr., Harry \ Connick, Jr., Harry (1967-) Son of the New Orleans District Attorney, who himself is now pursuing a career as a vocalist, Harry Connick, Jr. was born September 11, 1967.  His music-loving parents had owned a record store, and used their earnings to put themselves through law school.  At age six he played the "Star Spangled Banner" at his father's inauguration as DA in 1973.  His parents often took him into the French Quarter to hear the music pouring out of the clubs.  At age nine he joined the Musicians' Union, and his father hired some Dixieland players to make an album featuring his son.  A year later he made a second album with major players, including bassist Walter Payton and the late trumpeter Teddy Riley.  He worshipped James Booker, and his father set up lessons.  Young Harry was completely unaware of Booker's drug problem and just accepted the fact that Booker would sometimes throw up in the middle of a lesson. Connick eventually mastered the Booker style, in some respects with a more fluid technique than Booker himself.  At Jesuit High School he would play during lunch hour and perfected a Stevie Wonder imitation that his classmates still remember.  Afternoons he studied piano with Ellis Marsalis at the New Orleans School for the Creative Arts, where he was introduced to the main figures of contemporary jazz. Marsalis brought him to a Jazz Educator's conference in Kansas City one year, where he met George Butler of CBS records. Butler told him to call him when he got to New York. Connick left New Orleans for the Big Apple without graduating high school.  He looked up Wynton and Branford Marsalis and called George Butler many times, but with no results.  Meanwhile he had taken a job as organist and choir director for a Bronx church.  Eventually he was hired to do Mondays at the Knickerbocker, a major piano room in Greenwich Village.  One night while sitting in with Wynton Marsalis Butler was in the audience. He went up to Connick after the set and asked why he hadn't called.  The next day Butler agreed to make a demo.  Butler heard it and offered him a Columbia contract.  His self-titled first album (1987) was purely instrumental, including a version of "On the Sunny Side of the Street" dedicated to Booker and a tune "E" in honor of his teacher Ellis Marsalis.   He sang on his second album, "20" which rose to number 6 on the Billboard  jazz charts.  He got a job at the prestigious Oak Room of the venerable Algonquin Hotel, where he proved again that he was a consummate entertainer: handsome, interacting with his audience, he could trade places with his bass player Ben Wolfe, giving new life to standards through his vocals. His next big break came when Rob Reiner offered him to do the soundtrack to the film When Harry Met Sally.  The music was standards, but the established artists weren't interested. It was Connick's triumph.  The soundtrack album sold 200,000 copies and won him a Grammy.  His hometown fans lionized him at the 1989 Jazz and Heritage Festival and at four sold-out nights at Snug Harbor, where he had frequently played with his band, The New Orleans Jazz Couriers, before he had left for New York.  Soon he landed a role in the film Memphis Belle.  In 1990-1 he put out two more albums, a collection of romantic ballads called We Are in Love (1990), and a jazz trio effort Lofty's Roach Soufflé  (1991).  Soon he began world touring with a 16-piece orchestra.No one can deny his talent or his amazingly fast rise to world-wide popularity.  Some jazz critics consider him a lightweight, and he runs the risk of pursuing the more lucrative vocal career at the expense of his piano playing.  But if he stays on track he could have it all: a Sinatra-like career and a role in the serious jazz world, with his roots firmly in New Orleans sounds.

@008 Domino, Fats \ Domino, Fats (1928-) Born Antoine Domino, Jr. February 26, 1928, the most popular of the 50s rock and roll stars was one of nine children.  His first language was French.  His father had come from Vacherie, a small town upriver from New Orleans, worked at the racetrack and played the violin at home.  Fats heard the blues in his lower Ninth Ward neighborhood growing up (where he still lives today), played on pianos and horns, rather than on guitars, as was more common elsewhere in the Mississippi delta.  He taught himself to pick out tune on the piano, and dropped out of school after the fourth grade.  His most important musical influence was guitarist Harrison Verrett, 21 years his senior, who had played with Papa Celestin and Kid Ory and who married Fats's sister. Verrett oversaw Fats early musical development, instilling high performance and behavior standards in him and in other musicians of Fats' generation. Domino's early recorded musical influences were west coast R & B artists, notably Amos Milburn Roy Milton, Camille Howard, Charles Brown and above all Louis Jordan, the most popular black musician of the mid-1940s, who had made it onto the commercial charts.  Domino also listened to Louis Armstrong.  By his late teens Domino was gigging around the city, as well as working at the racetrack, on an ice truck, in a lumberyard and in a bedsprings factory where he nearly lost two fingers.  Band leader Dave Bartholomew took an interest in him and brought him to the attention of Lew Chudd of Imperial Records, who had come to New Orleans in 1949 from New York looking for new talent. It was DJ Poppa Stoppa (Duke Thiele) who directed them to Fats, who was playing in a Ninth Ward barroom.  Since it was illegal at that time for a cabdriver to take white patrons to a black establishment Chudd had to lie on the floor of the cab during the ride. Domino cut his first record "The Fat Man" for Imperial that same year, recorded in Cosimo Matassa's studio, where so many early R & B recordings were made.   The studio was attached to Matassa's J&M Record Shop; he had been fascinated with electronics and had opened the studio in 1945 when he was just 18 years old.   The recording machine was so primitive they had to have someone catch the plastic pieces the recording needle was digging out of the blank master as it recorded. Domino's main attraction was his rich, warm singing voice with its country French patois accents.  He was a shy person, almost overwhelmed by all the attention he was getting, and he'd often interrupt a take to ask how it was.  The record reached no. 6 on the R & B charts and was very popular in New Orleans.  On his fifth release "Every Night About This Time" he introduced the triplet chord figure which he made so famous.  He had gotten it from Texas blues pianist Little Willie Littlefield whose recording "It's Midnight" reached no. 3 on the R & B charts in 1949. Between 1950 and 1955 14 of Domino's singles made the top ten on the R & B charts, out of 26 releases, but he also was edging closer and closer to the white market.  Finally, in May 1955 his "Ain't That a Shame" made no. 10 out of Billboard's  top 100, the first song by a New Orleans R & B artist to break into the white pop charts.  It was covered that same year by Pat Boone, whose recording brought it to no. 1.  He won a Billboard DJ poll that same as their favorite artist.  He reached number five on the white pop charts with a rollicking dance number "I'm in Love Again" (not the Richard Rogers tune). Meanwhile the Shaw agency in New York booked his road tours.  In 1954 he had played the Rock-and-Roll Jubilee Ball at the St. Nicholas Arena in New York, organized by Alan Freed, the DJ who had coined the term "rock and roll."  Domino's first TV appearance was on the Steve Allen Show in 1956; he did the Perry Como Show  twice in 1957, and frequently appeared on Dick Clark's American Bandstand.   He also appeared as a performer in a number of rock-and-roll movies, among them The Girl Can't Help It  (the best one); Do re Me; Shake, Rattle and Roll; Disc Jocky Jamboree;  and The Big Beat. His early country roots stood him in good stead.  He covered a number of country and western tunes, the most famous of which was "Blueberry Hill," in 1956, first recorded by Gene Autry in 1941, and which Dave Bartholomew thought was horrible, until Chudd told him it had sold 2 million copies.  He also covered "I'm Gonna Be a Wheel Some Day" by Baton Rouge singer Roy Haynes (first recorded by Bobby Mitchell, a black New Orleans singer), and Hank Williams' "Jambalaya" and "Your Cheatin' Heart."  These recordings endeared him to a large white blue collar audience, which was unique among black R & B artists.  Meanwhile Ricky Nelson covered Domino's hit "I'm Walkin'" in 1957, and this launched Nelson's career as a pop star. By the early 1960s his voice had matured and he began to record some standards, since his producers were afraid the rock and roll phenomenon would decline.  He recorded "My Blue Heaven," "When My Dreamboat Comes Home," "Margie," and "I'm in the Mood for Love,"  all of which showed off a greater vocal range and polish.  But rock and roll turned into rock and broadened out with the British invasion of 1963, the year the Beatles took New York.  Lew Chudd had sold Imperial Records that same year.  R & B began to fade in popularity, replaced by the more socially and politically oriented rock music.  Domino's last song to make the charts was his cover of Paul McCartney's "Lady Madonna" which barely made the 100 slot on Billboard's  top 100 in 1968.   He was still playing Las Vegas regularly well into the 1970s (where he lost $180,000 in two weeks, while making $6500/week in salary).  In 1982 he made "Whiskey Heaven," which made the country charts, but his recording activity never returned to the level of his most successful years.  He still tours and appears regularly at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, playing his old successes.  Domino's compilation albums sell strongly.  EMI owns the old Imperial masters, and Domino '65  on Mercury captures his live act well.  Nowadays he mostly leads a modest life in the Ninth Ward, surrounded by his souvenirs and frequently cooking up a storm.

@009 Dr. John\ Dr. John  (1941-) was born Malcolm ("Mac") Rebennack in New Orleans November 21, 1941, his first instrument was the guitar.  Both his parents loved music-his mother had studied dance as a child.  As an infant he posed for local advertising photos of Ivory Soap.  At three he was picking out melodies on the family piano.  His earliest musical influences were from country music-Hank Williams, Roy Rogers, Gene Autry-but also blues pianists Roosevelt Sykes, Champion Jack Dupree and Memphis Minnie.  He listened for hours to the 78s his father Malcolm Sr. stocked in his radio, appliance and record shop.  A musical prodigy, he frustrated his nun piano teacher by playing exactly what she played right after she played it.  He chose the guitar to be his first serious instrument and immediately began picking out licks from records of Lightning Hopkins and Lightning Slim.  He loved the blues but had little patience for note reading. His father's friendship with Cosimo Matassa got him into the studio, where he pestered the musicians to show him licks.  He first saw Professor Longhair at a Westbank club called the Pepper Pot, but he had to watch through a window because he was underage.  He took guitar lessons from Fats Domino's guitarist, Papoose Nelson. His love of rock and roll caused him to quit Jesuit High School and completed his degree by correspondence.Rebennack did his first session work at age 15.  He formed a band with his high school buddies, which never lacked for work both in New Orleans and in the surrounding region.  Rebennack constantly crossed the color line and sometimes suffered repercussions from racist patrons, but he kept doing it.  He picked up African-American speech patterns and generally found acceptance among black musicians. Rebennack became a prolific song and session player on guitar in the late 1950s for local labels Ace, Rex and Ebb, playing on records with Joe Tex, Huey "Piano" Smith, Professor Longhair, Frankie Ford and others.  More than 50 of his compositions were recorded between 1956 and 1963, very few of which he received royalties for.   He wrote "Lights Out" for Jerry Byrne (one of his own band members), which became a legendary local hit with Art Neville on piano; as well as  "What's Goin' On" for Neville.  Under his own name he cut the instrumental "Storm Warning" in 1959 for the Rex label.  He hit the national charts with his tune "Lady Luck," sung by Lloyd Price, which reached no.14 on the pop charts in 1960, although he received no royalties for it. He met with somewhat less stellar success with his song "Losing Battle," sung by Johnny Adams, which hit no. 30 on the R & B charts in 1962.  He built up a roster of artists for Johnny Vincent of Ace Records, scouting out artists in some of the shabbiest places. On Christmas Eve, 1961 he received a bullet wound in his left index finger from a motel manager in Jacksonville, FL.  This cost him his brilliance on guitar, and he began to turn to keyboards, taking some lessons from James Booker on organ.  After the death of his father in 1962, the breakup of a marriage in 1964, and a bout with drugs for which he committed himself to a hospital in Fort Worth, TX. In 1965, he left New Orleans to join his mother and sister in Anaheim, CA.  There he hooked up with his old friend and fellow New Orleans musician, Harold Battiste, the music director for Sonny and Cher.  Battiste put him in touch with the local scene, and he became an active session player. In 1967 he created the character of Dr. John, based on the 19th century New Orleans voodoo adept, an enormous Black man who claimed to be a Senegalese prince, and who was consulted by thousands.  Battiste developed the marketing strategy and the time was right with alternative rock  beginning to catch on.  He recorded an album, Gris-Gris, which sold 50,000 copies and donned the sobriquet "the Night Tripper," a take-off on the Beatles' "daytripper."  At concert appearances he made an elaborate ritual of costuming, and his stage show offered a pop version of voodoo.  	Rebennack made one more LP with Battiste as his manager, Babylon,  a confused attempt to be politically hip; it sold poorly. Then he switched  to Sonny and Cher's manager, Charlie Green and made the LP Remedies, which drew deeply on New Orleans cultural references.   A serious argument with Green in London caused their breakup, and Rebennack was left in need of musical support to cut the album he had come there to make.  Mick Jagger and Eric Clapton among others came to his aid, and the LP, The Sun, the Moon and Herbs,  was made, featuring some of his best work.   But he was deeply in debt.  Fortunately Jerry Wexler of Atlantic Records came to his rescue and hooked him up with good management.  As a result he made a popular New Orleans style album Gumbo  in 1972, using the best of the New Orleans musical diaspora in Los Angeles, including Battiste.  The LP was a nostalgic tour through Rebennack's favorite New Orleans songs including "Big Chief," "Tipitina,"  "Those Lonely, Lonely Nights," Sugar Boy Crawford's "Iko Iko" and a medley of Huey Smith tunes.   The album was a hit, and Rebennack was in demand for tours, this time abandoning the elaborate costumes.  Next he recorded a highly successful LP with Allen Toussaint, Right Place, Wrong Time,  whose title cut reached Billboard's  top 10 in the summer of 1973.  TV appearances followed.  In 1978 he recorded City Lights  and in 1981  Dr. John Plays Mac Rebennack, a gorgeous piano solo album which includes tributes to his father ("Big Mac") and his mother ("Dorothy").  In 1985 he put out a 5-audio tape series of lessons on New Orleans Piano on Homespun Tapes, followed a few years later by a video cassette on the same label. Rebennack continues to record and perform, making regular appearances in New Orleans and living in New York.

@010 Jackson, Tony\ Jackson, Tony (1876-1921) Anthony "Tony" Jackson, the archetype of the "Storyville Professor," admired by Jelly Roll Morton, was born in New Orleans June 5, 1876.   Although he never recorded he was known for his excellent technique and wide-ranging repertoire, which extended from operatic arias to the blues.  His principal style was ragtime, the main popular music of that milieu of his day.  Jackson was in constant demand in the high-class sporting houses of Storyville, the infamous "district" where prostitution was declared not illegal between 1898 and 1916, when the Navy department forced its closure. Jackson was said to have been a creative improviser and an expressive ballad and blues singer with a high clear voice.  He was a sought-after accompanist and a prolific composer, although his only composition which became a standard is "Pretty Baby."  Morton looked up to him and substituted for him on occasion.  Jackson spent the last decade of his life in Chicago, where he died in 1921.

@
