@001 Basin Street was written by Spencer Williams. A classic Dixieland tune, introduced in 1929, played here in the traditional manner with the verse in  front of the chorus both at the beginning and at the end.  Butler's rendition demonstrates the effectiveness of simplicity and conviction. " I started playing this tune when I worked solo at the Hilton.  At first I considered it as a "tourist" type tune, but after I played it for a while I started liking it and that I should work on my own arrangement, as you have here.  As with the other tunes in the Dixieland repertoire, I've recorded this in here in a four hand version to make up for the absence of a band (Henry Butler) ". ; Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@002 Birth of the Blues was written by Ray Henderson Originally composed in 1926, this tune made a comeback in 1942; played here in solid, medium-tempo stride with some boogie asides in the bass, and flavored with the New Orleans piano idiom throughout. Henry Butler started playing this tune when he worked solo at the Hilton: " At first I considered it as a 'tourist' type tune, but after I played it for a while I started liking it and decided that I should work on my own arrangement." As with the other tunes in the Dixieland repertoire, it is recorded here in a four hand version to make up for the absence of a band. Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@003 Blues After Midnight is a lush, sultry bluesy ballad in the New Orleans piano idiom. It was written and performed by Henry Butler. Henry wrote this song while in a recording studio. When asked about the time, he was told it was "after midnight," and immediately the melody came to his mind.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@004 Chapel Of Love was written by Jeff Barry, Ellie Greenwich (music) and Phil Spector (words); It is performed here as a four-hand processional. Watch the bass line's steady propulsiveness and the gospel chordal accompaniment, along with the interspersed double-time lines in the New Orleans R & B idiom.  This song was performed by the Dixiecups in 1964. Henry enjoys playing this tune because of its simplicity , subtle Dixie flavor, as well as the New Orleans r&b style of the 50s.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@005 Do You Know What It Means to Miss New Orleans was written by Louis Alter and Eddie De Lange. The New Orleans style touch comes in the phrase endings in this rendition which stays close to the melody throughout. This is a beautiful ballad from 1946, which has become a New Orleans standard.  It has been recorded by most Dixieland groups.  "Only after I first heard it live played by Pete Fountain did I real that the tune had some depth and that I wanted to create my own arrangement of it (Henry Butler)."  
Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@006 Down by the Riverside .This is a four-hand version in which the pianist uses broken chords, scale fragments and melodic displacement to create a breathtaking contrapuntal romp out of this simple traditional song. This was one of the "fusion" tunes of the early 20th century,  combining march, gospel and blues.  It actually dates from 1865.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Dick Hyman.
@007 Dr. Diddley . This Henry Butler original has its own vamp and interlude and a very clear overall structure. The hallmark here is high energy within strict rhythmic forms. "I wrote as a tribute to Bo Diddley, who influenced New Orleans music and was influenced by it in turn. (Henry Butler)"  Note recurring bamboula  rhythm, which we is used in the USA in its Brazilian form, with accents on the following numbered eighth notes: 1..4..7./..3.5... Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@008 Dr. James was written by Henry Butler. The two-handed vamp which forms the basis of this driving tune is typical of James Booker's style.  It combines elements of the Latin montuno, swing, and gospel.  The montuno  element is its rhythmic and harmonic repetitiveness; the swing element is the rhythmic feel, and the gospel element is the underlying IV-I relationship of the alternating chords, embellished with the use of the bIII chord. The bridge is closer to pure Butler, however, and the improvised section is a very dense example of Henry's New Orleans piano style unleashed. This is a tribute to James Booker, who has influenced every modern blues and folk pianist coming from New Orleans.  He had technique and lyricism as well as good rhythmic chops. " I worked opposite James Booker in double bills at Tyler's, Lu and Charlie's and the Toulouse St. Theater from 1975-9 (Henry Butler) ". Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : James Booker.
@009 The Entertainer is the familiar rag written by Scott Joplin. New Orleans pianists have always enjoyed playing ragtime in New Orleans style. Here, after a deceptive introduction, melody and improv remain side by side throughout the four-strain piece.  Pure fun. Henry Butler first published this arrangement on the Village CD (MCA impulse, 1987). "I didn't like the original composition (from 1902) that much; but the tune is so widely requested—since it was the theme music to The Sting—that I felt I had to come up with my own arrangement, and so I place 30 years ahead of its time in the stride style, and I've always played it like that.  The intro is deliberately misleading. (Henry Butler) " Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Fats Waller.
@010 The Gospel According to Henry was written by Henry Butler. With a triplet gospel feel, this piece is full of simple conviction. This piece represents an example of an original gospel tune in the shuffle medium, very common in many black Baptist churches through the late 70s and early 80s.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@011 John Brown's Body is attributed to Charles S. Hall. This four-hand version is a good collection of New Orleans R & B piano devices over a march bass, with an extended coda. AKA the Battle Hymn of the Republic. This song can be interpreted using many different styles . The tune as it's played by Dixieland groups has all of the flavors that combine to make it "fusion" tune. As with the other tunes in the Dixieland repertoire, it is recorded here in a four hand version to make up for the absence of a band.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@012 Lawdy Miss Clawdy was written by Lloyd Price. Henry plays it as a boogie-woogie, and manages to squeeze a lot of fun out of its short, 8-bar blues form.  Watch for his beautiful modulatory coda.  First recorded in 1952, "Lawdy, Miss Clawdy" was the first crossover release in R & B history.  As Los Angeles label owner Art Rupe said: " A blues classic I first heard in a version by Sugar Boy Crawford. "The record was very, very successful, to my knowledge that was the first black record that wasn't intended to be a white record; it became a white record versus the previous black records which were designed for the white market....I can't tell you what happened, but white people, white kids began to buy this record.  The had heard it on black stations and I think it started in the South oddly enough where we felt there was the most prejudice.  I think that's where the cultures overlap, musically there was less prejudice in the South.") Henry Butler loves playing this tune -" I was a kid at the time, and it just stuck with me.   I like to find a way to play the tunes I grew up with at some point in my life. Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@013 Mardi Gras in New Orleans was written by Henry Roeland Byrd. Professor Longhair is another one of those innovative pianists who has influenced most of the modern blues/R & B and folk pianists from New Orleans.  This was one of the original pieces that made him famous, introduced in 1949 and became a classic, still selling each year at Mardi Gras time.  Butler plays it here with a driving street beat.
Henry Butler got a chance to take some lessons from Professor Longhair in 1976."  I learned a lot of how he thought and approached the piano.  I've always felt indebted to him. " Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Professor Longhair.
@014 Mardi Gras Mambo written by L. Welsch, F. Adams and Ken Elliott.  A very Caribbean tribute to New Orleans' favorite holiday.  A perennial classic, which makes the charts every year in the Crescent City. " This is one of those pieces I heard when I was 10 or 11.  I was attracted to its Caribbean flavor and have always sought an outlet for an arrangement of this piece (Henry Butler) "  It was introduced in 1954 by the Hawkettes, with Art Neville as lead vocalist and keyboardist, having been written by DJ Ken "Jack the Cat" Elliott along with clothier Lew Welsch and his friend Frankie Adams.  It has become an anthem of Mardi Gras and sells records every season.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Professor Longhair.
@015 Margie  written by Con Conrad, J. Russell Robinson (music) and Bennie Davis (words). This tune which epitomized the popular song of the 1920s was covered by Fats Domino in 1959, which is the origin of its place in the New Orleans R & B repertoire.  Butler's version is a joyous contrapuntal romp through New Orleans piano. "I heard it when I was young, in the 50s.  It always stuck with me, and I always wanted to play arrangements of it, mainly because it lends itself to lots of different styles—Dixieland, 50s R & B, jazz, swing, and stride (Henry Butler) .  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@016 My Blue Heaven written by Walter Donaldson (music) and George Whiting (words); played by Henry Butler. This tune which was typical of the popular song of the 1920s was covered by Fats Domino in 1956, which is the origin of its place in the New Orleans R & B repertoire.  A classic example of how well New Orleans piano is suited to stride.  Watch for the exuberant right-hand fills, the extravagant contrapuntal left-hand bass figures and walking tenths. " I heard it about the time I was just starting to take piano lessons.  It always stuck with me, and I always wanted to play arrangements of it, mainly because it lends itself to lots of different styles—Dixieland, 50s R & B, jazz, swing, and stride (Henry Butler) " .Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Fats Waller.
@017 Orleans Inspiration was written by Henry Butler. A masterful use of suspension in this very satisfying, multi-sectional tune in contrasting keys and a very driving rhythmic base.  It features a challenging obbligato section with a virtuoso display of New Orleans piano pyrotechnics." When I knew I was going to leave New Orleans in 1978, two years before I actually left, I decided I needed to write a document that expressed my feelings about the city. At that time I felt the spirit of the city as representing a constant party atmosphere, a restless, fun place (Henry Butler) " In this song there is an allusion to Dixieland as well as gospel, roots music, some jazz flavoring, and some R &B—New Orleans has all of that. The ostinato pattern in the left hand represents that part of the New Orleans music that utilizes a vamp, especially the way the new funky brass bands play, like Dirty Dozen and the Rebirth.  It's a repeated strutting or marching figure. Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@018 River's Invitation written by Percy Mayfield. This is an excellent example of a tune that is both relaxed and propulsive thanks to the "sprung" rhythm of Butler's bass—his consistent use of 16th-note pickups to hammer home the downbeat.  Richly textured. Percy Mayfield also composed "Hit the Road, Jack" and "Please Send Me Someone to Love." Percy Mayfield was one of the better blues composers.  "I especially like this tune because Mayfield may have had New Orleans in mind:  it has a New Orleans feel and lends itself well to a Dixieland beat and feeling (Henry Butler) .Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@019 San Francisco Blues was written by Henry Butler. A country and gospel flavored blues at medium tempo with a James Booker style bridge, it combines many New Orleans currents. Henry wrote this while in San Francisco recording Blues and More Vol. I  for the Windham Hill Jazz label. " I like the feeling of being by the water in San Francisco and appreciate their efforts to try to understand the blues out there.  It was written as tribute to that city, which has much in common with New Orleans (Henry Butler) "Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Mosley.
@020 Second Line written by Bill Sinigal and R. Hines. This is a four handed rich Dixie piano arrangement. This tune has so many flavors to it!  Like the "Saints" and "Down by the Riverside," it has in it the Dixieland/marching band feel, a parade beat, as well as references to blues and gospel, with its call and response elements.  Although it sounds like a traditional tune, it was actually introduced in 1962 and bears striking resemblance to Bill Haley's "Rock Around the Clock."  It is also known as "Joe Avery's Blues."  As with some of the other tunes in the Dixieland repertoire, it is recorded here in a four hand version to make up for the absence of a band.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@021 Stagger Lee written by Lloyd Price and Harold Cogan. This blues ballad about a legendary pimp was a 1958 million seller.  Butler's version is a laid back stride treatment of this 8-bar blues classic, kept interesting  with a modulation towards the end, and a delightfully extended coda. " I started playing this blues to attract tourist ears and later grew to like it quite a bit (Henry Butler) " Watch for the key changes and the transition from stride to boogie-woogie and back in this rendition.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@022 Sweet Georgia Brown written by Kenneth Casey and Maceo Pinkard. A Dixieland classic from 1925. Butler's version is a virtuoso masterpiece, rooted in the Dixieland tradition, revealing his considerable powers in the contemporary jazz idiom. " I've heard this time practically all my life.  I first associated it with the Harlem Globetrotters, and when I got old enough to play it, I thought it would be nice to have my own arrangement of it (Henry Butler) " The melody is overdubbed here ,as with some of the other Dixieland tunes, to get the maximum flavor from it. Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@023 When the Saints Go Marching In written by Katherine E. Purvis and James M. Black. This New Orleans classic was written in 1896.  Butler uses it as an occasion for a romping march through New Orleans piano. The melody is overdubbed to get as much of the Dixieland feeling that a single pianist could realize.  Performed by: Henry Butler. Picture Of : Henry Butler.
@024 Big Chief written by Earl King; popularized by Professor Longhair. Earl King wrote this and Professor Longhair had a hit with it in 1964. The bizarre arpeggiated Bb augmented chord in the right hand has become a signature lick of New Orleans R & B the world over.  It's a lot of fun to play.  From New Orleans to Copenhagen to Japan everyone plays it slightly differently.  The rumba is ever present, as it is in the two other Fess selections in the New Orleans Pianist, and as played in 'funky' style (as it is supposed to be played )  It's important to note that the New Orleans idiom provides the perfect vehicle for utilizing the piano's percussive possibilities and gives you the opportunity to play not just the straight melody or bass riff, but also to imply what might be going on with rhythmic accompaniment.  The drums play a crucial leading role in the music of this part of the world, and solo pianists often have to be an orchestra in themselves. In this selection the idea is to imply the snare drum part (in the right hand), the bass drum part (in the left hand), the horn stabs (in the left hand), as well as the melody and the piano part.  Always remember that the bottom line with this stuff is that it is dance music. Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Professor Longhair.
@025 Burnt Mouth Boogie written by Jon Cleary. This delicate, sensitive little romp around the keys is a fairly standard left-hand New Orleans boogie pattern speeded up a tad.  The fun begins into the two hand ascending and descending parallel thirds which go charging off up the keyboard into no mans land before collapsing back on the IV chord.  " I never know what I'm doing next with this one.  It comes out completely differently every time I play it. Much of the spirit of New Orleans music is about spontaneity and improvisation, and often it's fun to throw yourself in the deep end and see how many ways there are of climbing out.  I think that in keeping with the tradition, any type of eccentricity within the boundaries of taste should be encouraged (Jon Cleary ) " . Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@026 Burn Mouth Boogie left hand alone.  We've included this as one of Cleary's lessons; this one illustrates boogie possibilities.  For Cleary's comments see the memo under the tune.  Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@027 Creole Lament written by Jon Cleary. A mysterious tune which begins like "Saint Louis Blues," but almost immediately proceeds to deeper territory, retaining its "Spanish tinge" throughout. This melody is  evocative of the dark sensitive side of both New Orleans and Havana, cities linked by common culture and historical experience.  Geographically they are close, and musically they are often but a few steps apart.  This tune has a Cuban lilt in the opening in G minor section, then shifts up a gear into a New Orleans second line feel when it modulates to Bb major.  The melody finally returns in the original key and the tune ends on a dissonant chord that lies somewhere between and outside the two keys.  The Creoles of colour of both Havana and New Orleans bridge much of the gap between European and African musical traditions, completing the musical spectrum and giving us many of the rich textures that we have to work with today.  Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@028 Go Ahead, Baby  is a tune that Jon Cleary  wrote in London "whilst feeling homesick for a kind of melodic and rhythmic flavour you don't seem to find outside of New Orleans. (Jon Cleary) "  It is light hearted, a little melancholy with quite a bouncy rhythm that you can dance to.  It's a "funk" tune in the New Orleans sense of the word, the first bridge having the I/V/I bass line that could almost be country and western if it weren't for the syncopation of the [virtual] drums behind it.  It has that good time/old time atmosphere ( which is why Jon chose it as the first tune on his first album ).   Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@029 The Gospel According To Cleary written by Jon Cleary. This comforting tune in 12/8 is typical of the kind of music played at the beginning of a Baptist Sunday congregation in New Orleans  Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@030 You've Got Something Walking Closer To Thee written by Jon Cleary. This feel and this form are fairly typical in New Orleans and show that the music that they call rhythm and blues there is never far from its gospel roots.   The world may change but the musical sentiment is the same. This tune is related to two other New Orleans tunes: "Just a Closer Walk with Thee," which is a traditional spiritual that's often played (at a much slower tempo) at jazz funerals, that is, musicians' funerals; and "Something You've Got," which was a regional R & B hit by Chris Kenner in the 50s that went on to become known nationally and internationally, covered by many people.  Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@031 Pop's Dilemma written by James Booker, Jr. (the pianist's father).We've included two version of this tune in The New Orleans Pianist.  Tom McDermott's stays quite close to the original Booker recording, while Cleary gives us a version that is his own.  Note especially the wandering tenth excursion Cleary takes, expanding the form of the first head exposition. A charming, bouncy tune. "When I first came to New Orleans as a teenager James Booker played regularly on Tuesday nights at my local combination bar/laundromat [the Maple Leaf, which has since given up its washing machines, but still thrives as the uptown spot for roots music].  Many a night I drank  a beer and washed my socks to the accompaniment of Booker howling away in the back.  On his up tempo tunes he would often use a fairly strong left hand voicing of octaves and fifths.   In my version of "Pop's Dilemma" here I take a few liberties with some extended parallel tenth progressions (as is my wont!) and stretch at some of the other sections while hopefully not straying too far from the general feel of the original. (Jon Cleary)". New Orleans piano is constantly evolving:  it's important that a thorough knowledge of the existing repertoire should be combined with an elements of the "pioneer spirit" in breaking new ground and developing the genre, in order that it doesn't become a musical "dodo."   Pianists like Morton, Fess and Booker are so important because they broke the mold and in so doing kept their styles fresh.   Performed by Jon Cleary . Picture of :  James Booker.
@032 Raise The Rafters written by Jon Cleary:" I played for a while as the pianist in a black Baptist church in Central City New Orleans and my favorite part of the service (which usually went on all afternoon to the accompaniment of red beans and rice and fried chicken) was toward the end when things got really frenzied and the congregation would clap to a fast tempo groove  with the preacher soaked in sweat, shouting "I feel all right!" over a I/IV groove pattern.  On the bridge section I've halved the tempo and shifted some of the accents to show the fairly logical progression from a straight 2/4 gospel feel to a 4/4 funk groove". Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Professor Longhair.
@033 Tipitina written by Henry Roeland Byrd (Professor Longhair). First recorded in 1953, this tune has become one of the anthems of New Orleans R & B, with a famous club bearing its name in honor of its composer.  It is prime example of how Professor Longhair fashioned a new style out of a combination of Caribbean, especially Cuban rhythm and the blues with a swing feel, as Cleary notes below:  "Tipitina" is a well-known Professor Longhair tune that I first heard on Dr. John's Gumbo album.  It was the first tune I ever tried to syncopate on a piano, baffled as I was by the weird syncopated rolling octaves that lead from the I to the IV chord in the second bar of the form.  It's a classic 8-bar blues whose lineage can be traced back through "Tee Nah Nah" by Smiley Lewis (with Tuts Washington on piano) to Fats Domino's first hit, "The Fat Man," and to an old tune that Champion Jack Dupree called the "Junkers Blues" back in the 30s and maybe before.  This simple 8-bar blues has gotten progressively funkier over ten years, the melody basically remaining the same, but the left hand on right hand counterpoint getting more and more eccentric with every new generation of pianists.  This is my favourite flavour of New Orleans funk, and it hovers just this side of the musical border between second line New Orleans funk and Afro-Cuban montuno  and tumbao (Jon Cleary)  Performed by Jon Cleary . Picture Of :  Professor Longhair.

@034 12/8 Groove (lesson) by Jon Cleary. Here is an example of the wonderful rolling feel which comes straight out of the gospel tradition, to be taken up by Fats Domino and then reused in a variety of contexts. Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@035 Dixieland Groove (lesson) by Jon Cleary.  Here Cleary shows what can be done on solo piano to evoke a Dixieland setting.  By themselves these grooves make excellent accompaniment, either for a vocal or for other instrumentalists.  Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@036 Funky Indian Groove (lesson) by Jon Cleary. Mardi Gras Indian, that is. The rhythmic pattern that runs through  all the Indian grooves and are very much a part of the rhythmic "sound" of New Orleans is 1..4..7./1..4..7. [numbering the eighth notes in a measure and accenting numbers 1, 4, and 7], a sort of New Orleans version of a Cuban clave. [also known as "hambone," and similar to the "Charleston."]  In the original version it was played on the snare drum, here the part is voiced with the left hand.  This is another example of using the piano to recreate the sound of a full band, hinting at brass parts, drum patterns, melody lines and horn arrangements. "Feel good music way down in your soul. Gonna make your body do a slow boogie roll. "Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@037 Mardi Gras Funk Groove (lesson) by Jon Cleary.  This is another example of the Latin influence in New Orleans music in the 50s.  This groove is typical of the one which underlies Professor Longhair's "Mardi Gras in New Orleans," a real "evergreen" tune that's resurrected every year at Carnival time—great fun to play and like all Fess's tunes a percussive feast on the 88s.  The pianistic approach to this tune is a bit like that of a conga player, to concentrate on the rhythmic possibilities while occasionally messing with the substitutions to give what is essentially a simple tune some harmonic variety.  The left-hand pattern has an emphasis on what they call in Cuba the guaguanco clave  or "rumba clave," a 2-3 pattern clave [i.e. with two accents in the first measure and 3 in the second of every pair of measures], and  in order to stop it sounding jerky or awkward the 16th notes of the bar are voiced as a conga player would to provide a steady pulse, a backdrop against which the syncopation can really sound syncopated.  Funky accented off-beats only work if you constantly remind the listener where "one" is [i.e., the first beat of each measure]. Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.

@038 Funky Indian Groove Ii (lesson) by Jon Cleary.  " This is a groove I put down while thinking of the rhythm to the Meters'  'Hey Pocky Way.'  The Meters are the funkiest of New Orleans rhythm sections to come out of the 60s and 70s.  "Hey Pocky Way" comes from a chant that the black Indian tribes of New Orleans sing on Mardi Gras day all over town.  It's patois, the original meaning having long ago been lost, though the tradition is very much alive today.  [Some guess that the original meaning was "Tuez bas qui ouais,"  or "kill anyone who stands in the way," evoking the original combative postures that the Indian gangs assumed towards each other, and which often erupted into violence, a practice which had stopped by the 50s.] The rhythmic pattern that runs through  all the Indian grooves and are very much a part of the rhythmic "sound" of New Orleans is 1..4..7./1..4..7. [numbering the eighth notes in a measure and accenting numbers 1, 4, and 7], a sort of New Orleans version of a Cuban clave. [also known as "hambone," and similar to the "Charleston."]  In the original version it was played on the snare drum, here I voice the part into the left hand.  This is another example of using the piano to recreate the sound of a full band, hinting at brass parts, drum patterns, melody lines and horn arrangements. "Feel good music way down in your soul,  Gonna make your body do a slow boogie roll." Performed by Jon Cleary Picture of :  Jon Cleary.
@039 Dance of the Networkers was written by Tom McDermott.:" The odd left-hand pattern here is certainly derived from some Latin-style pianist I've heard along the way, perhaps Michel Camilo.  The more New Orleans music I experience, the stronger I feel this city's musical ties with the rest of the Caribbean. "  The title refers to a fashionable activity which occurs at contemporary social gatherings. Performed by Tom McDermott.: Picture of :Tom McDermott.
@040 The Fingerbreaker written by Jelly Roll Morton. Morton recorded this tune only once in 1938, but never published it or copyrighted it.  It was finally transcribed from the recording by James Dapogny in his magnificent edition of Morton's collected piano music [see bibliography].  Morton called it "the most difficult piece of jazz piano ever written," which may or may not be true, but certainly signals its bravura status.  It's a three-strain piece, the first strain being somewhat forcibly extended to create an AABA form, according to Dapogny, although Morton wisely plays only half of it on the repeat.  The third strain is the most interesting one melodically.  Morton builds on it with four improvised choruses after the first statement, ending with a simple repetitive figure which dominates the fourth and fifth chorus, where melodic interest yields to rhythmic excitement, much as he does in "King Porter Stomp."  There are no recaps: he ends at the peak of energy.  McDermott's version is very close to the Dapogny transcription, but he learned it from Hyman's recording before the Dapogny came out.  Also known as the "Finger Buster," this virtuoso showpiece may have been written to challenge the New York stride pianists with whom Morton had a bitter rivalry.  My rendition is much influenced by Dick Hyman's version on Columbia, which I heard before Morton's original recording.  The piece took me months to learn, but has proven to be a reliable war-horse ever since. Performed by Tom McDermott.:Picture Of:  Jelly Roll Morton.
@041 Grandpa's Spells written by Jelly Roll Morton. Morton recorded and published this piece in 1923.  Dapogny thinks it is one of Morton's oldest pieces, since it is the only Morton manuscript in 2/4 time, the typical ragtime meter. This is one of Morton's raggier pieces, and it is played fairly straight albeit with a few un-Mortonesque touches, like tenths in the left hand. Beware playing this opus when club-owners are around--the elbow crash in the trio section makes them extremely nervous!  Performed by Tom McDermott.: Picture Of:  Jelly Roll Morton. 
@042 Heavy Henry written and played by Tom McDermott. A study in two-handed syncopation with right-hand 16th-note double chords. Filled with Butlerisms, this piece is nonetheless more intricately syncopated than any of Henry Butler's actual compositions." This piece was born when I took a two-bar riff from the great Henry Butler and expanded it into a12-bar blues somewhat reminiscent of his groundbreaking style (Tom McDermott.) ."  Playing the head is a good exercise for subdividing the beat between right and left hands.  Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture of :Tom McDermott.
@043 King Porter Stomp written by Jelly Roll Morton. Written in 1906 for Morton's friend Porter King, the piece was first recorded in 1923 and copyrighted in 1924.  Morton recorded this piece more than any other of his compositions.  The riff-dominated third strain builds to a peak of joyous energy and pointed the way for big band leaders and arrangers of the following generation. Jelly's best-known composition was made famous by big-band leaders like Fletcher Henderson and Benny Goodman.  This performance leans heavily on Morton's l938 recording (included in James Dapogny's book of Morton transcriptions), which swings mightily and builds to a wonderful climax.  Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture: Jelly Roll Morton. 
@044 Lithuanian Stomp written  by Tom McDermott: " This piece was conceived in Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania, during a l993 visit, but don't ask me why it came to me there. The funky bass line is a variation of a pattern I heard David Torkanowsky play once, while the right hand has figures reminiscent of the novelty rag, "Kitten on the Keys," which my mother used to play now and then.  You can't escape your roots, nor should you try. Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture of :Tom McDermott.
@045 Martin's Mambo was written by Tom McDermott. Watch out for the wicked poly-rhythms in this piece which demonstrates McDermott's mastery of the judicious use of diminished-over-dominant harmonies: as in Bb diminished over Bb7, which also translates as Bb 7[+9,+11, 13]). Tom explains:" I know, this ain't no mambo, but the title works better for me than "Martin's Rumba," which would be more accurate. " The left-hand ostinato is James Booker as filtered through Harry Connick Jr. and is challenging but fun to play.  Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture of : James Booker.
@046 The Pearls written by Jelly Roll Morton. Written in 1919 and dedicated to a waitress at the Kansas City Bar in Tijuana, this is one of Morton's most admired works.  When Morton considered this piece difficult he was referring less to its technical challenges than to the aesthetic task of making its contrasting strains make sense together, according to Dapogny. Morton was especially proud of this piece, calling it, along with "Fingerbreaker", "one of the two hardest jazz piano pieces ever written."  This piece seems to lend itself to a more casual interpretation than the others (listen, for instance, to Mary Lou Williams' 1936 trio version) and it is played here in a more contemporary style with hints of the later New Orleans pianists throughout.  Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture:  Jelly Roll Morton. 
@047 Pop's Dilemma written by James Booker, Jr. (the pianist's father) Contrast this version, which sticks pretty close to the Booker original, with that of Jon Cleary who adapts it to his own style.
This is a pretty faithful rendering of a wonderful piece, as recorded by James Booker on his "Junco Partner" LP.  "Booker was the greatest in my and many people's estimation, and the rich (and difficult!) left-hand pattern he used in this piece is one of my favorites(Tom McDermott.)" . Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture Of :  James Booker.
@048 Rebennackin' written by Tom McDermott. A challenging piece featuring walking broken octaves in the bass, and charming modulations." This is my attempt to compose a piece in the Dr. John (Mac Rebennack) style, with his rumbling bass and ever-engaging chromaticism. (Tom McDermott.)"  The first progression - from B-flat to G7 to E7 - explores diminished-pattern root movement in a way that Doc and James Booker (check out his tune "Classified") sometimes do.  Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture of :Tom McDermott.
@049 Summer was written  by Tom McDermott. A languorous tango, with slow-resolving dissonances, numerous gracious ragtime allusions, and an extended coda which hangs like mosquito netting over the end of the bed.  (Turn up the A/C!) "I wrote this the year I moved to New Orleans, 1984, when I first experienced the intense August torpor of the place.  Joplin connoisseurs might also notice the influence of his beautiful "Solace," which he calls a "Mexican serenade." (Tom McDermott.)"  Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture of :Tom McDermott.
@050 Willie Fugal's Blues written by Professor Longhair. This 10-bar variation on "Tipitina" is played straightforwardly, much in line with Professor Longhair's version on the "Crawfish Fiesta" album—though at times the left hand is busier than Longhair's.  This may have been an unconscious attempt to fill in the conga of Uganda Roberts.  Performed by Tom McDermott. Picture of :Tom McDermott.
@051 Big Nasty Thomassie written  by David Torkanowsky. An insistent, driving blues with a minor-mode bridge.  Catch that low-down body-womping beat, which gets its penetrating power both from the hard-but-relaxed rhythm and the gospel flavored chords. "This is written for John Thomassie, a big nasty 350 lb. drummer from the west bank of the Crescent City. This guy stretches eighth notes into the next century (David Torkanowsky)" .  Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :David Torkanowsky.
@052 Bogalusa Strut is a a traditional piece .Torkanowsky begins this bouncy tune in its original ragtime setting, then slides gracefully into the New Orleans R & B piano style, with some tasty later references to the original setting. This southeastern Louisiana town is the focus of this very old traditional tune.  It happens to be where Henry Roeland Byrd, aka Professor Longhair, was born.   Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :David Torkanowsky.

@053 Corner Ursulines written  by David Torkanowsky. An 8-bar blues romp in the tradition of "Stagger Lee" but with a bridge, demonstrating the elasticity of the style.  The sound is pure fun, with its mixture of James Booker and Professor Longhair bass rhythms, its dirty bluesy ornamentation. The corner of North Rampart and Ursulines, on the edge of the Old French Quarter, was the home one of New Orleans most important Jazz clubs called "Lu & Charlie's." As important as the stellar playing that went on inside, the exchanges between musicians that took place outside on the corner was where attitudes and philosophies regarding our music evolved.   Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :James Booker.
@054 Dirge For James Black written  by David Torkanowsky. The dirge is an important genre in a city which prides itself on its [above ground] cemeteries. [See also "St. James Infirmary" in this collection.]  This is a beautiful and sensitive lament for one who was much more than a friend.   Notice how the right hand sustains sound with tremolos and fills. " My personal mentor, and true genius, James Black was a New Orleans drummer who went on to play and record with Yusef Lateef, Don Pullen, Miles Davis, Jimmy Smith, Horace Silver, Ellis Marsalis, and Wynton Marsalis. Also a prolific composer, James influenced the lives and music of many contemporary New Orleans musicians.(David Torkanowsky)". This composition is reminiscent of his funeral procession on the way to "cut him loose" at the graveyard. Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :David Torkanowsky.
@055 A Heap See, But A Few Know written  by David Torkanowsky. A gently rolling 9/8 gospel/spiritual original, with all the warmth of a vesper service. As with most of his tunes, Torkanowsky adds touches of harmonic sophistication which never jar with the stylistic setting, instead enriching it in the best taste.  It concludes with a deceptively charming coda. This expression, used in the Spiritual and Baptist churches, means that while most people might experience the same event, only a few are of the wisdom to know what it means. Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :David Torkanowsky.
@056 My Bucket's Got A Hole In It (traditional) . Torkanowsky's treatment proves what can be done to take simple tune virtually a children's song, and infuse it with such charming New Orleans style passage work and ornaments that the music fairly winks at you. This traditional tune, first recorded by Buddy Bolden, is one of the oldest and most enduring funky New Orleans ditties. Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :David Torkanowsky.
@057 New Orleans was written by Hoagy Carmichael.. Torkanowsky begins this tune as a slow nostalgic lament, only to transform it into a solid swing stride, à la Erroll Garner, one of his early influences. Notice the gentle, but effective reharmonizations, especially the substitution of the sus chord for the dominant.  Ironically, the only tune called "New Orleans" in this collection is played in a style that goes furthest afield from New Orleans R & B towards contemporary jazz. This beautiful and unjustly neglected 1933 Carmichael ballad is a favorite of many New Orleans musicians, including Wynton Marsalis, who recorded it. Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :David Torkanowsky.
@058 St. James Infirmary is a traditional piece. Originally written as a dirge-ballad, this tune has been played in many different tempos, as Torkanowsky illustrates here.  The importance of the dirge to the culture of New Orleans reminds one of that venerable New Orleans institution, the jazz funeral, in which the band played slowly on the way to the cemetery and up tempo on the way back to the reception at a local bar, where, as Morton informs us, musicians were assured of getting a square meal. Listen for the bass melody during an entire chorus, which leads into the Booker-style romp.  In this version Torkanowsky plays an additional right-hand track, full of breakneck lines and spicy embellishments.  You may listened to the tune in either the two- or three-handed version. This hospital used to be located on Rampart St. during the time of Storyville. The words tell of the death of a young girl as told by her lover.   Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :Jelly Roll Morton.
@059 St. James Infirmary is a traditional piece. Originally written as a dirge-ballad, this tune has been played in many different tempos, as Torkanowsky illustrates here.  The importance of the dirge to the culture of New Orleans reminds one of that venerable New Orleans institution, the jazz funeral, in which the band played slowly on the way to the cemetery and up tempo on the way back to the reception at a local bar, where, as Morton informs us, musicians were assured of getting a square meal. Listen for the bass melody during an entire chorus, which leads into the Booker-style romp.  In this version Torkanowsky plays an additional right-hand track, full of breakneck lines and spicy embellishments.  You may listened to the tune in either the two- or three-handed version. This hospital used to be located on Rampart St. during the time of Storyville. The words tell of the death of a young girl as told by her lover.   Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :Jelly Roll Morton.
@060 Satin' On Da Stoop was written  by David Torkanowsky. A James Booker-style romp that oozes sass, with some modern jazz harmonies to tastefully spice it up. On hot, humid summer nights in New Orleans, many neighbors congregate on each other's front steps or "stoop." This tune evokes memories of this uniquely southern tradition.  The particular title refers to an aristocratic woman wearing a formal gown as she "sats on da stoop. "Performed by David Torkanowsky. Picture of :David Torkanowsky.
@061 Charleston Rag was written by Eubie Blake. Eubie Blake, who wrote this challenging rag at age 17 in 1899, used to regale his New Orleans fans with it during the 1970's. After his "rediscovery" in the entertainment world he became a regular feature of the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival almost up until the year of his death, which occurred five days after his hundredth birthday in 1983.  I watched Eubie play this piece at the home of jazz historian Al Rose around 1978; Rose subsequently wrote Blake's biography.  The piece is full of mystery and bravado.  Although Blake sloughed it off as "just a collection of tricks" it is very cleverly constructed, beginning darkly and ending with a celebration of energy and technical brilliance.  Its syncopation and the prevailing rhythm are solidly ragtime but it shares some important traits with later developments in jazz piano. Though lacking Morton's swing rhythm and contrapuntal bassline figures, "The Charleston Rag" uses a number of dramatic devices which Morton used and which were adopted by the Harlem stride pianists such as James P. Johnson and Fats Waller, notably dramatic  breaks, interludes, changes of register and the shout chorus principle in the last strain in which a melody is repeated over and over to build tension.   It was Blake's first piano rag, composed in 1899 when he was just 17 years old.  Performed by : Joel Simpson. Picture:  Eubie Blake.
@062. Late Night Blues was written  by Joel Simpson: "I wrote this piece for a local TV talk show hosted by Tony Ponseti.  It is a high energy blues with a call and response happening between the opening motive in the first two measures and the syncopated filler figure in the next two (Joel Simpson) "  The filler figure becomes the concluding motive creating an energy peak in the 10th bar—where it belongs.  Notice how typical blues figures are used in the improvised section and how tension builds and is released.   Performed by : Joel Simpson. Picture of Joel Simpson.
@063 Maple Leaf Rag/Scott Joplin version, 1899; This is Joplin's most famous rag, along with "The Entertainer,"  in its original sheet music version.  In 1899 it was revolutionary in popular music, with its syncopated eighth notes, dramatic run up the piano, and chromatic chords, even though the melodic material is quite simple, mainly based on broken chords in the first two strains.  But the point is the rhythm.  In the third strain the melodic passage work serves as a response to the chordal rhythmic motive at the beginning.  The fourth strain consists of two energy build-ups, the second of which must have sufficient weight to end the whole tune.  The multi-strain AABACCDD form was taken from march music.   Performed by : Joel Simpson. Picture Of :  Scott Joplin. 
@064 Maple Leaf Rag/Jelly Roll Morton version, 1938, In his famous interviews with musicologist Alan Lomax at the Library of Congress Morton illustrated his New Orleans style with contrasting renditions of the "Maple Leaf Rag,"  first in the "Joplin" version ("the way they played it up river")—which he still managed to embellish in his own way—and then in his jazz version ("the way I played it down river").   As this is a note-for-note transcription shows, Morton introduced swing rhythms, moving octave left-hand lines, a variety of left-hand rhythmic devices, crushed grace-note smears in the melody, an introduction, and a different melody each time a strain is repeated.  It's pure Morton, though unmistakably the "Maple Leaf Rag."  Performed by : Joel Simpson. Picture of Joel Simpson. Picture Of: Jelly Roll Morton. 
@065 Big Chief was written by Earl King; Guitarist Earl King wrote this tune and Professor Longhair made it famous in 1964.  The band version starts out with Fess on piano solo, with the other  instruments coming in later.  Tenor sax plays the left-hand motive, along with the bass.  Fess whistled a chorus before he began to sing.  The whistled chorus is represented here in the second chorus.  As a blues it is a one-song demonstration of just how versatile the form can be.  If you imagine the left-hand line as played by a bass drum and the right-hand line by a snare drum with no other melody instruments but the voice, you get an idea of the sound of Mardi Gras Indian music.   This version for piano solo is similar to Dr. John's "piano rendition " of the tune.   Performed by : Joel Simpson. Picture Of :  Professor Longhair.
@066 Whirlaway was written by Allen Toussaint; This tune is a tribute to the Mardi Gras Indians.  The left hand beats out an Indian strut rhythm, a version of the famous New Orleans street beat.  The hook of this tune is the delayed resolution of the dominant chord in bars 9-11, leaving only one measure to return to the tonic and have a turnaround.  Dr. John has said that this gives a shared experience of suspense to dancers and listeners, which strengthens the collective festive spirit, and thus the common culture of the city.   Performed by : Joel Simpson. Picture Of :  Allen Toussaint. 
@						

