@001 Berfect, Sam*\ (1942- ) Berfect grew up in the Progressive Baptist Church in New Orleans.  At age eight he played the organ at the National Baptist Convention in Kansas City, MO.  He organized his first group, the Sammy Berfect Singers when he was 17, which included four singers plus himself on organ and vocals.  He still reveres his music teacher, Mrs. Jessie Chriss, with whom he studied for 21 years, and whom he credits with his success.  He also studied at Southern University in New Orleans.
 Besides his home church, he has served as the Minister of Music at seven other churches in New Orleans.  Berfect has accompanied such artists as Mahalia Jackson, Rev. James Cleveland, Clara Ward, Bessie Griffin, Dorothy Norwood, Mattie Moss Clark, and Vernard Johnson.  Outside the realm of Gospel, he has accompanied Aaron Neville, Johnny Adams, Earl King, Marva Right, James Rivers, Irma Thomas and Tommie Ridgley, appearing at jazz festivals and conventions all over the world as well as the Superbowl CBS Entertainment.
 Currently Berfect leads his own group Sammy Berfect and the Dimensions of Faith, a 45 person choir, as well as the New Zion Baptist Church Choir, the Union Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church Choir and the Solomon Burke Revue.
 Health problems have plagued Berfect over the past few years.  Near-death experiences have inspired some of his religious compositions, including the one in this program, "I'm Changed, and I Know That He Is Real."  Berfect's high blood pressure led to kidney failure, and he received a kidney transplant–donated by his oldest daughter–in 1993.  Berfect is sure that the strength of his faith saved his life.

@002 Bethune, Derrick\ Bethune, Derrick* (1971-) A native of New Orleans, Bethune began taking lessons at age 9, soon after which he decided to concentrate on Gospel music. His first regular engagement was with the First Pilgrim Baptist Church. A recipient of many awards, Bethune has played for many churches and Gospel singing groups, including the Gospel Soul Children and Tyrone Foster and the Arc Singers. He currently plays piano and organ at the St. Joan of Arc Catholic Church in uptown New Orleans.
@003 Bradford, Alex (1927-1978)\ Bradford grew up in Bessemer, AL, hotbed of Gospel quartets, but he was more inspired by the elaborately robed Prophet Jones, who played the piano with his feet.  He was a Gospel singer/personality/showman who fit no one's mold. After the war he joined forces with Roberta Martin in Chicago, where he floored audiences with his powerful falsetto. He formed his own male group in the '50s, whose specialty was pastiching female groups' sounds in falsetto, notably that of the Ward Singers.  The Bradford Specials, as they were know, also excelled in line dancing.  Bradford composed over 300 Gospel songs, the most successful of which was "Too Close to Heaven," recorded on Specialty in 1953.
 Bradford had a major career in musical theater.  Langston Hughes wrote Black Nativity  just for him; it opened in 1961.  Then he appeared on Broadway in 1972 with Don't Bother Me I Can't Cope and in 1976 with Your Arms Are Too Short to Box with God.  
 Known as "Professor Bradford" for his unconventional ways he coached Madeleine Bell, whom he hired out of the Glovertones in 1960, to "sing right over" her lost voice.  Then he punched her in the back, which tripled her volume.  He is also known for being ruthless with unscrupulous promoters, and once rescued his money by jumping off the stage during a performance to catch a promoter leaving with the goods through a window.

@004 Brownlee, Archie (1925-1960)\ Arguably the hardest quartet singer of any group he was the lead singer of the Five Blind Boys of Mississippi.  The group had come out of the Piney Woods School for the Blind near Jackson, MS, whose principal, Lawrence Jones, had been organizing fund-raising vocal concerts for the school as early as 1922, always going under the name of the Cotton Blossom Singers.  Brownlee, along with Lloyd Woodard, Isaiah Patterson, Joseph Ford and Lawrence Abrams did just that, performing before wealthy white benefactors, but they stayed together after their 1944 graduation under the name the Jackson Harmoneers.  In 1946 they were joined by Rev. Percell Perkins, an experienced lead singer who soon became their manager, shaping their style away from sturdy spirituals and towards more dramatic, hard driving quartet singing.  By 1950 their nickname became their formal name, the Five Blind Boys, and they signed with Peacock Records, owned by Don Robey.  They were Robey's first Gospel success, leading him to sign other talent in the field.
 The Five Blind Boys were very successful in the '50s, packing 40,000 seat auditoriums like Dallas's Cow Palace and Los Angeles' Convention Hall. They occasionally made big money, but more often ended up with small sums, the rest having gone to less than scrupulous promoters.  Brownlee died of pneumonia in Charity Hospital in New Orleans in 1960, but the group continued, travelling to the UK in the '60s.

@005 Henry Butler* (1948-)\ Born in New Orleans in 1948 Butler, who was rendered totally blind by an infantile eye disease at age two months, was attracted to the piano as a young child.  He began receiving formal musical training at the Louisiana State School for the Blind in Baton Rouge at age 8.  Throughout his youth and adolescence he absorbed the piano styles of New Orleans R & B from Professor Longhair, James Booker, Tommy Ridgely and Eddie Bo as well as involvement in gospel accompaniment.  He broadened his interest to include mainstream jazz while studying for his B. A. in voice at Southern University in Baton Rouge under the tutelage of clarinetist, composer, recording artist Alvin Batiste.  Batiste introduced Butler to the jazz legacy of John Coltrane, Charlie Parker, Bud Powell and Art Tatum, but he also pointed him in the direction of music from folk cultures of Africa, the Caribbean and South America, what 20 years later came to be called "world music."
 Butler became an active performer, playing his own multi-cultural mix of jazz, New Orleans R & B and musics of the world.  He earned a Masters in vocal music from Michigan State and received grants from the National Endowment of the Arts to study with pianists Roland Hanna and George Duke and with saxophonist Cannonball Adderley; he also studied privately with Harold Mabern.
 Back in New Orleans in 1974 he continued to absorb his hometown influences.  From 1976 to '78 he taught at the New Orleans Center for the Creative Arts, the arts high school which spawned the Marsalis brothers, Donald Harrison, Terrence Blanchard, and Harry Connick, Jr.   He also spent some time with Professor Longhair, learning Fess's idiosyncratic licks and tricks.  This influence added to the study of contemporary jazz pianists like McCoy Tyner, Chick Corea and Keith Jarrett, as well as twentieth century composers Debussy and Bartòk forged Butler's broad stylistic approach to the keyboard.  It is an approach deeply rooted in a solid, propulsive, highly nuanced sense of rhythm, complete hand independence, solid mastery of jazz and blues idioms from the entire century's history of the genres, lightening fast technique, and excellent taste.
 Butler moved to Los Angeles in 1980 where he gigged in local restaurants, clubs and on the radio.  He worked as a composer, arranger and actor on director Oz Scott's docudrama Dreamland  and as a talent development consultant for Motown and the Stevie Wonder Organization.  
 After sitting in with bassist Charlie Haden and drummer Billy Higgins at the Comeback Inn in Venice, CA in 1984, however, he received an offer to record for MCA, resulting in his major release, Fivin' Around, which Billboard  considered one of the top ten jazz albums of 1986.
 Butler moved to Brooklyn and gigged around New York from 1986 to 1990, and making his second CD for MCA, The Village,  in 1987.   He signed with Windham Hill in 1989 and recorded a live CD at Tipitina's in New Orleans called Orleans Inspiration, which was released in 1990.  Also that year he began teaching music at Eastern Illinois University in Charleston, Illinois.
 Butler's fourth album, Blues and More,  co-produced by George Winston on Windham Hill, is a combination of New Orleans style piano and sophisticated world-beat music. He considers it his best product and has recorded a second volume.  

@006 Caesar, Shirley (1938-)\ Daughter of a minister and one of 12 children, Caesar grew up in Durham, NC.  Her father was a member of the local Gospel quartet Just Come Four, and she made her singing debut at age eight.  By age ten she was singing with two sisters and a cousin as the Caesar Sisters, appearing at churches and schools. By age 12 she had a reputation throughout the South as "Baby Shirley."  She studied business education at North Carolina Central College, but left in 1958 to join Albertina Walker and the Caravans, becoming known for her "runs" and her "shouts for Jesus."  At first the diminutive Caesar was given the task of opening the show by delivering old-time power sermonettes, rousing the audience to a fever pitch before bringing on Walker and Inez Andrews.  But soon she grew tired of this auxiliary role, and when Andrews left in 1961 she took the lead of the Caravans, and brought them to their peak with such crowd pleasers as "Comfort Me," "Hallelujah," "It's Done," "Running for Jesus," and "Sweeping Through the City."
 Caesar left the Caravans in 1966 to form her own group, favoring a rock Gospel style.   She was named the best female gospel singer by Ebony Magazine  three times, and became the first Black female singer to win a Grammy, for her recording of "Put Your Hand in the Hand of the Man from Galilee" in 1972, and won a Dove award in 1982.  That same year Caesar married Bishop Harold Ivy Williams of Winston-Salem's Mount Calvary Holy Church, where she became co-pastor.  With over 2500 attendees, the wedding cake was eight feet long, and the bride and groom sang their vows to each other.

@007 Charles, Ray* (1930- )\ Born Ray Charles Robinson in Albany, GA, he was blinded by age six by glaucoma and orphaned at 15.  Although he attended church as a youngster, he never sang in a choir.   He began by singing R & B to help support himself.  Although he never considered himself a Gospel singer, he has been highly influenced by Gospel, and primarily by Alex Bradford (q. v.).  But it goes farther than that.  Charles' calculation as a performer was to derive as much musical inspiration as possible from Gospel but to avoid any direct religious references.  This is what has given him his superstar status as a crossover artist and father of the soul movement.  As a pianist, he employs virtually the straight Gospel idiom, although he makes no direct reference to it in his lyrics, mixing it with masterful doses of virtually every other pop style.     For Charles, the Gospel component is one of emotional authenticity, as he tells it, "A Gospel music background is important to a jazz musician for it draws out feeling.  What you speak of as soul  in jazz is soul  in Gospel music.   The important thing in jazz is to feel your music, but really  feel it and believe it–the way a Gospel singer like Mahalia Jackson obviously feels and believes the music she is singing, with her whole body and soul." 
 And Charles' capacity to use Gospel style in his soul music even goes farther than that–to the point of lifting musical material right out of Gospel songs and adding secular lyrics to them.  For example: "What'd I Say," "Hallelujah," and "I Just Love Her So" are fairly direct parodies, while "This Little Girl of Mine" is a direct steal from Clara Ward's "This Little Light of Mine."  And his tune "Lonely Avenue" is taken note-for-note from "How Jesus Died" by Jess Whitaker of the Pilgrim Travelers.
 Now Charles wasn't the first to combine Black religious music with the blues and jazz. LaVern Baker and Dinah Washington had done it in the late 40s.  But he was the first to create a new, very commercially successful genre out of it, soul.  Once he marked out the space many singers came to fill it, among them Sam Cooke, Aretha Franklin, Lou Rawls (from the Pilgrim Travelers), Wilson Pickett (from the Violinaires), Roscoe Robinson and Joe Henderson (from the Fairfield Four), David Ruffin (from the Dixie Nightingales) and Johnnie Taylor (from the Soul Stirrers).

@008 Cheeks, Julius (1929-1981)\ Rev. Julius Cheeks devastated his audiences with primitive roaring lead singing at the head of the Sensational Nightingales.  He is credited with bringing rock to Gospel.  From Spartenburg, SC, Cheeks was raised in extreme poverty, living off of fat-back and molasses.  He left school after the second grade to  work the cotton fields all day with his brothers and sisters, who got whipped by their mama at night for their trouble, so he never learning to read or write.  But Cheeks obtained a recorded Bible when he was 24 and wore it out.  He was singing with a group called the Baronets when the Nightingales came to town, heard him and the following day picked him up at the filling station where he worked and took him with them.  They trained all day, standing around a broom suspended from the ceiling, which they pretended was a microphone.  Cheeks said it was as hard as plowing.
 The Nightingales made their first recording in 1949 and went on to record for both King and Decca, with their best material on Peacock from the mid-'50s, including such songs as "Standing in the Judgment," "The Blood of Jesus," "It is No Secret," and "Burying Ground."  Cheeks had joined the Soul Stirrers in 1940, but returned to the Nightingales in the '50s.  He began preaching in 1954 and formed his own group in the '60s which didn't last out the decade.  He briefly sang with the Mighty Clouds of Joy.  From 1970 until his death he preached in Baltimore, Newark and Miami.
  Cheeks ignored doctors' instructions to go easy on his voice, and towards the end of his life it became quite raw.  Some say he sang himself to death.  Credited as the originator of rock Gospel, Cheeks was one of the first to move into the audience to make direct contact with the spectators.

@009 Jon Cleary* (1962-)\ Born in 1962 in London into a musical family, Cleary started playing guitar at 5.  He grew up hearing a mixture of music at home: Gospel, soul, Dixieland, New Orleans jazz, New Orleans rhythm and blues, rock and roll and old English music hall melodies.  He started playing in bands at 11, and at 15 joined English slide guitarist Roger Hubbard.  Cleary left England for New Orleans at 17 and spent a few years there learning, listening to and studying New Orleans piano players.  He put together a six-piece band playing New Orleans R & B funk in London, and after two years returned to New Orleans and began playing with Walter "Wolfman" Washington, Johnny Adams, Earl King, Snooks Eaglin, and occasional spot gigs with such local luminaries as Ernie K-Doe, Jessie Hill, Tommy Ridgely and Eddie Bo.  
In 1989 Cleary accompanied Joe "Cool" Davis at a Baptist church in New Orleans over a period of three months.
 Over the past five years Cleary has appeared at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, the Havana Jazz Festival, Kobe/New Orleans Jazz Festival in Japan, Dublin Blues Festival, Soho Jazz Fest (London), and others in Australia, Hong Kong, Switzerland, Austria and elsewhere.  "Anyone playing New Orleans piano style is playing church music," says Cleary.  "All that music is rooted in the church. There has always been a fair degree of crossover between church music and secular music. The Lastie family were a good example of that.  Their father was one of the first people to play kit drums in a church band."
 As leader he has recorded Alligator Lips and Dirty Rice  on Ace Records.   As sideman he is on Perfect Companion with Mighty Sam McLain (Orleans), That's Where It's At  with the Holmes Brothers (Rounder), Walking a Tightrope  with Johnny Adams (Rounder), Live at Tipitina  (compilation) (Tipitina Records), Late Last Night  (Rounder) and Testimony  (Domino) both with John Mooney.

@010 Cleveland, James* (1932-1991)\ Grew up in Depression-racked Chicago, practicing an imaginary piano on a windowsill, he became an accomplished jazz pianist by the time he was in high school.  He trained under Thomas A. Dorsey (q. v.), the official founder of Gospel music at the Pilgrim Baptist Church as singer and pianist, and derived great inspiration from him.  At age 16 he was selling his own songs to the pioneer Gospel publisher and singer Roberta Martin for $40 apiece, and at 18 cut his first recording for Apollo as part of the Gospelaires, a brief spin-off from the Roberta Martin singers.  During the '50s he moved around from group to group and recorded two big hits with the Caravans, "The Solid Rock" and "Old Time Religion."  But by 1960 he had found his niche in leading large choirs.  He signed with Savoy and soon sold 100,000 copies of "Christ Is the Answer" with the Angelic Choir of Nutley, NJ.  His second album with them, however, Peace Be Still,  went gold and became the best selling Gospel album of all times, earning him the nickname the "Crown Prince of Gospel."
 Cleveland has never sung to white audiences and never allowed compromise with the white commercial establishment.  Yet he was among the first to make Gospel music into big business, to mass market it, while keeping it within the African American community.  In 1968 he established the highly influential Gospel Music Workshop of America, which sponsored community based choirs across the country.  A hard-nosed businessman and superb performer who was deeply committed to spreading appreciation for and participation in Gospel music, Cleveland came to be recognized as the "King of Gospel" by the millions of church people he helped.

@011 Coates, Dorothy Love McGriff*\ (1928-) Born Dorothy McGriff into a musical family in Birmingham, AL, she was playing the piano in church by the time she was ten.  She sang with the Royal Travelers and the McGriff Singers (her family group) as a teenager and joined the Original Gospel Harmonettes in Birmingham in 1945.  She stayed with them until they disbanded in 1958, and in 1961 she reorganized the Harmonettes with entirely new personnel, including her sister Lillian.  The Harmonettes were the main group to challenge the power of the Caravans and the Ward Singers.  Dorothy emerged from one of the heartlands of male Gospel quartet singing and married into it twice.  First to Willie Love of the Fairfield Four and later to Carl Coates of the Sensational Nightingales.  Her vocal style contrasted with the Original Harmonettes, who tented to sing with precision and restraint.  Her approach was rather one of urgency, and she pushed herself to the limits.  She felt the stresses of southern racism but held up under it.  She believed greatly in the work of Martin Luther King, Jr. and participated wholeheartedly in the Birmingham marches, considering jail an honor.  Never indulging in the flamboyant excesses of a Clara Ward, Coates had a commitment to justice equal to her commitment to God, and the truth that she has lived has commanded an enduring respect from her African-American public.

@012 Cooke, Sam (1931-1964) Born in Chicago, the son of a Baptist minister, he joined the Highway QCs as a teenager.  He first heard Rebert Harris when his group opened for the Soul Stirrers.  When Harris quit out of moral disapproval over the sexual behavior of Gospel performers, Soul Stirrer tenor Roy Crain invited Cooke to replace him, having heard him with the Highway QCs.  The youthful, handsome Cooke proved an asset to the group, not only due to his singing.  The group travelled throughout the US, Canada and Mexico, and Cooke came of age as an artist, at first imitating Harris and then defining his own smooth style, ending up as a teen idol.  Finally he was approached by Specialty records to become a single act in the pop market, where he could make much bigger money.  After hesitating he took the bait, studied the pop market, and even went to drama school for a while.  His first two recordings were unremarkable, but when he recorded "You Send Me" with his brother L. C. Cooke he had a hit.  Ironically, Specialty rejected it, but it was picked up by West Coast Keene Records, on whose label it sold 2.5 million.  Cooke became the first superstar of soul, though he felt a lingering guilt about leaving Gospel.  So when he formed his own label, SAR, he made sure to record a substantial amount of Gospel, including the Soul Stirrers, and Rebert Harris's new group, the Paraders.  But he couldn't go back.  The church wouldn't let him.
 When he appeared at the Soul Stirrers' anniversary concert in Chicago with Harris as the MC, the entire crowd went dead when he came up on the stage.  There were shouts of "Get that blues singer down...This is a Christian program," and he left the stage devastated.
 Cooke was killed in a Los Angeles motel in December, 1964.  The woman who shot him claimed it was rape; his manager said he'd stumbled into the wrong room.  Some said it was a Mafia killing.  He had a massive funeral, attended by such pop/soul luminaries as Lou Rawls, Bobby Blue Bland and Ray Charles.  Many lovers of Gospel music believe that Cooke's best work was done with the Soul Stirrers.  A year after his death his own composition "A Change Is Gonna Come" became a soul classic.  It's a pure Gospel hymn.

@013 Crawford, Davell* (1976- )\ Growing up immersed in Gospel music in the Catholic Church, Davell began playing and singing in church and on weekends in the French Quarter starting at age seven.  By age 11 he was conducting three choirs: his church choir, school choir and the neighboring school choir.  He was also leading his own Gospel group, the True Spirit.  His family moved to Lafayette, LA, briefly, and he attracted so much attention he claims he merely had to stand at bus stop and pull out some change and someone would offer him a ride. 
 Davell's great uncle is the immortal jazz vibe player Lionel Hampton, and his grandfather is the famous James "Sugarboy" Crawford, composer of the New Orleans R & B standard "Iko, Iko."  The elder Crawford was a successful travelling musician with his own group during the early '60s, but in 1963, while travelling to Monroe, LA, with his band and pianist Smiley Lewis, he was brutally beaten by Monroe police, who wrongfully accused him of drunkenness and speeding.  The result was brain damage which abruptly ended his singing career and forced him to learn to talk all over again.  Now "Sugarboy" Crawford is a locksmith by trade, but he still comes on stage at Davell's Jazz Festival appearances and gives a strong performance.  Davell says he still learns things at the keyboard from his grandfather.  
 By age 17 Davell had mastered piano and organ and played 10 other instruments.  He studied at the New Orleans Center for the Creative Arts, an arts high school where Wynton and Branford Marsalis and Harry Connick, Jr. studied, and where Ellis Marsalis was head of the music department, until he left to take a post at the University of Virginia for two years.  During that time Crawford came under the tutelage of trumpeter Clyde Kerr, Jr. who introduced him to the music of Sarah Vaughan.  She quickly became his vocal idol, and he does a wonderful imitation of–or rather tribute to her. Davell's influences on piano include Oscar Peterson and his friend and mentor Dr. John (Mac Rebennack) whom he refers to as Uncle John.  His major blues influence is B. B. King. 
 Davell has performed throughout the US, Europe and South America.  Recently he made a self-titled live CD at the Bourbon Street Club in São Paolo, which has just been released on the club's own label.

@014 Crouch, Andrae* (1942- )\ Crossover artist of Gospel music, who has toned down its emotional pitch to make it more salable to white audiences.  Also known for his outreach programs to bring God to drug addicts in southern California.   He grew up in East Los Angeles, where his father, originally in the cleaning business and acting as a spare time Sanctified minister, accepted the pastorate of a church with no music director.  He laid his hands on the nine-year old Andrae and asked God to give his son the gift of music.  Within two weeks he was playing hymns and soon he was directing a choir.  Avoiding the ministry, he joined "Teen Challenge" a fundamentalist outreach organization in Los Angeles aimed at drug addicts, sponsored by the Church of God in Christ. He began song writing, formed a choir of his rehab candidates and claims he saw miracles happen.
 His slick fusion of R & B , country, jazz and Latin rock went over very well with white audiences, and Crouch gloried in the knowledge that the Gospel message was reaching an ever-increasing number of people.   A 1974 concert at Carnegie Hall in New York City was turned into a live album that became his best seller to that time.  Industry people began to see Gospel as a category of show business, and Crouch went on to make more and more successful albums, using well-known stars and groups such as Joe Sample and Leon Russell.  Paul Simon even took up his song "Jesus Is the Answer," giving Crouch a million seller.  Crouch was arrested for possessing a small amount of cocaine in 1982, but the charges were dropped.
 He has become immensely wealthy through his worldwide Crouch ministries, with several mansions in California and Hawaii.

@015 Dixon, Jessy* (1938- )\ From San Antonio, TX, Dixon became acquainted with Gospel music as a teenager through the recordings and concerts of the Ward Singers, Dorothy Love Coates and the Original Gospel Harmonettes.   He was discovered by the Pilgrim Travelers' manager J. W. Alexander, who got Brother Joe May (the "Thunderbolt of the West") to hire him. His parents disapproved.  His father was a Methodist businessman and his mother a member of a Sanctified church which didn't approve of Gospel.  She wanted him to go to college and become a proper musician. So for a while he studied piano at St. Mary's College in San Antonio. But when James Cleveland (q.v.) passed through and heard him, he offered Dixon a job with the Golden Chimes. Cleveland completed his education as a musician and showman, while paying him $25 a week, which was more than enough for the young Dixon.
 While acting as a studio musician for Savoy, accompanying the Roberta Martin singers, the label owner Herman Lubinsky overheard him singing "There Is No Failure in God," and offered to record him on his own. Success came to him leading choirs, following in the footsteps of his mentor James Cleveland.  Dixon began leading the Chicago Community Choir, an amateur group who did benefits for institutions such as hospitals and jails, but Savoy recorded them and made a hit, then invited them to Carnegie Hall on the same bill with Cleveland and Shirley Caesar.
 He experienced conversion in 1972.  He says that before that, although he sang religious songs he did so without deep religious conviction.  He started a new label as a result and released the tune "It's All Right Now," but his music still continued to sound like pop.  He continues to make slickly produced Gospel music, mainly for white audiences around the world and has been accused of being overly emotional in his performances.

@016 Dorsey, Thomas A.*\ (1899-1993) The son of a country Baptist preacher from rural Georgia, Dorsey was intent on learning to play the piano, walking more than 30 miles a week to take lessons from the only teacher around who would teach Black children.  He became a child prodigy on the instrument.  He worked as a water carrier for the circus as a child and attended evangelical revivals held in circus tents.   As a teenager he played blues piano for Saturday night dances, but economic conditions were hard, and his father moved the family to Atlanta for better prospects. There Tom hung around the theater running errands for the performers.  It was a violent section of town, controlled by Black gangsters.  On top of that, Black migration from rural areas before World War I created tensions which erupted in race riots in 1906 and a subsequent resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan.
 Dorsey moved north to Chicago in 1916, taking with him the expertise in both blues and spirituals which he had developed in Atlanta.  He moved easily back and forth between the two worlds, which generally disdained each other.  He'd heard Bessie Smith in 1912 and later Ma Rainey, and was struck by them, leading to a parallel secular career in the blues.  He finally got to work with Rainey in the late 20s.  Meanwhile, new currents in Black churches brought stirring singers like Clara Hudmon into prominence–whom Dorsey said was as strong as Bessie Smith–and powerful, inspiring preachers such as Rev. J. M. Gates and  the Rev. A. W. Nix, whose recorded sermonettes were selling in the tens of thousands.
 The Chicago race riot of 1919, which left 23 Black people dead, 600 injured and around 1000 burned out, compelled Dorsey to return to the Church, joining the Pilgrim Baptist Church–a name which rendered homage to the Black migrations–and formally converted at the National Baptist Convention which met at his church in the summer of 1921.  There he heard the Rev. A. W. Nix, whose powerful singing/shouting preaching style galvanized the convention and convinced Dorsey of his vocation: a Gospel singer.  (Nix went on to record one of his sermonettes, "The Black Diamond Express to Hell" for Vocalion, which along with Gates' "Death's Black Train Is Coming" on Columbia easily outsold the biggest names in secular blues in the Race market.)
 But the road wasn't direct for Dorsey.  He got an offer to tour with Ma Rainey in the late 20s and took it under the name of Georgia Tom, eventually composing a number of Rainey's hits, and coming under her spell as a singer.  (Rainey eventually returned to the church and died in 1939).  Dorsey married, and his wife Nettie restored his piety, but not for long.  He soon teamed up with Tampa Red (Hudson Whittaker) and in 1928 recorded the scandalous hit "It's Tight Like That," which earned him an amazing first royalty check of $2400–as well as the enmity of the Baptist churches.  
 Gospel music was entering more and more into Black worship, representing younger churchgoers who had been open to popular blues growing up as well as the more Afrocentric traditions of the Sanctified or Holiness churches, whose movement had started in the 1890s (see Glossary).  But it was also being staunchly resisted by the old guard Black churches–the Baptists, Methodists and Methodist Episcopals–who stood by the hymns and spirituals as purer music, untainted by secular and "lewd" elements.  One could read this as a rejection of African ethnic roots and an identification with white society. 
 It was the Depression that created the conditions for change, and Dorsey who tipped the balance.  With unemployment skyrocketing to as much as a third of the workforce and the African American community getting the brunt of it, desperation spread.  Dorsey was playing rent parties for 35 to 50 cents a night for four hours, while hundreds of store front churches sprung up in city ghettoes, often establishing thrift shops selling used clothing and household items for a few pennies.  Into this social setting Gospel music injected joy and hope, which it communicated on a visceral level.  The masses of poor Black people embraced it wholeheartedly, and the Baptist Church was the first to recognize this change in taste and intense need for the powerful emotional uplift provided by this music.  At the National Baptist Convention in Chicago in 1932 Dorsey got the musical directors to agree to let him sell his music, after hearing one of his songs, "If You See My Savior" performed and receiving a huge response.  Immediately afterwards he organized a Gospel choir at the Ebenezer Baptist Church, which then became the city-wide Mecca for the music.  It was there that Sallie Martin, a singer who had grown up in the Holiness Church in Georgia near Dorsey's point of origin (without knowing him) joined forces with him and spread the word.  Although not a great singer, Martin had a flare for promotion and was crucial in the spread of the music to other churches in other cities.
 While on the road with Martin, however, Dorsey received word that his wife Nettie had died in childbirth.  He rushed home and after a week of grieving composed "Precious Lord," which many to be his most powerful composition.  When Martin left Dorsey in 1940 he replaced her with Willie Mae Ford Smith (q. v.), and after her with Mahalia Jackson (q. v.).  Dorsey propagated his compositions mainly through the selling of sheet music in addition to his live appearances in churches.  The record industry was suffering from the Depression, the race market having almost completely collapsed, and spiritual records were cut back.  Sermons, such as those of Gates and his colleagues, and jubilee quartets, much of it reissue material, was the mainstay of the market during the mid-30s.  As a new sound Gospel music was beyond consideration at the time by the record companies.
 The Second World War changed all that, and at war's end the golden age of Gospel recording began, extending until 1965.  Dorsey became part of the Gospel establishment, conducting song studios and concerts at the National Baptist Conventions.  He was the first African American named to the Nashville Song Writers Association.  He was elected to the International Hall of Fame in 1979 and the Georgia Music Hall of Fame in 1981.  He is heavily featured in the Gospel documentary Say Amen, Somebody  (1983) along with Willie Mae Ford Smith.


@017 Falls, Mildred*\ She first appeared with Mahalia Jackson in 1946, and performed and recorded with her for two decades after that.

@018 Franklin, Aretha*\ (1942- ) Daughter of the Rev. Charles L. Franklin, pastor of the 4500 member New Bethel Baptist Church of Detroit, who recorded over 70 albums of sermons and had two uniformed nurses standing by during his preaching to aid any parishioners who fainted.  A highly successful minister, he was nonetheless fined $25,000 for tax evasion in 1967.  Nevertheless, he lived close to the ghetto of Detroit, and the young Aretha was surrounded by pimps, hustlers and dope dealers.  These were the models of success–apart from her father–in her community.  Her mother deserted the family when she was six and died four years later. Fortunately the young Aretha had support from friends, including the Clara Ward singers, Frances Steadman and Marion Williams to help her recover from these traumatic events.  She also received frequent visits from Sam Cooke, James Cleveland and Mahalia Jackson. She would watch the singing which often last all night long at her home.  But it was only at the funeral of an aunt, when Clara Ward "shouted herself into a trance" (Broughton, p. 98) that she became convinced she wanted to become a Gospel singer.
 She made her debut in her father's church at age 12, to great acclaim, and by age 14 she was on the road with the Franklin Gospel Caravan, driving eight to ten hours a day, unable to stop at most restaurants because of segregation, to make gigs her father flew to.  It aged her prematurely.
 Soul music was in full swing by the time she was 18.  Columbia signed her, but her recordings went no place.  Then under the careful tutelage of Jerry Wexler of Atlantic, who returned her to her Gospel roots with heavy Memphis R & B backup she produced a million seller in "I Never Loved a Man the Way I Loved You."  Wexler had found the winning formula with her: a church feel in an R & B setting, making her the Queen of Soul. (Broughton, p. 99)
 A disastrous marriage to a Detroit street hustler and her victimization at the hands of her physically abusive manager Ted White in 1967 led to an emotional withdrawal.  Several years of painful searching followed, during which she sought help from her spiritual mother, Mahalia Jackson.  Finally, in 1972 James Cleveland arranged a "home-coming" concert/recording session in the new Temple Missionary Baptist Church in Los Angeles which lasted two days.  She chose the hymns and Gospel tunes she felt deepest about including Clara Ward's "How I Got Over," Inez Andrews' "Mary Don't You Weep," and Dorsey's "Precious Lord."  Her finest moment, however, came at the climax of a ten minute rendition of "Amazing Grace."  Her father stepped up to the mike and announced with pride that his daughter had "never left the church."
 A month later Mahalia Jackson died, and Franklin sang "Precious Lord" at the funeral.  Her career never really picked up after that.  She returned to soul, but has never been able to tap into her earlier power.

@019 Dranes, Arizona\ (1904-1957) Blind pianist/vocalist from Dallas, Dranes grew up playing the piano and singing Gospel and was encouraged to record her music by her pastor, Bishop Samuel Crouch.  In     she was invited to Chicago to record for Okeh records with Sara Martin.  She and Sallie Sanders were the first women to enter Gospel singing professionally, since during the '20s the field was dominated by male quartets.  Although she recorded extensively, she did not receive royalties for much of her work.  She recorded with Rev. McGee's Jubilee Singers in Chicago in 1926, on which we hear her piano playing and her distinctive nasal voice.  She also performed with Laura Henton and Jesse May Hill. She became very powerful in the Sanctified church and was a major influence on Rosetta Tharpe.

@020 Green, Al\ (1946- )  Al Green, originally from Forrest City, AR, was raised on Gospel music in the Baptist church, with Sam Cooke and the Soul Stirrers as his major influence.  He became the tenor lead as a child in his family's group, The Green Brothers.  Then when Cooke switched to pop, Green tried to do the same but was censured by his pious family.  His pop career really began when he moved to Grand Rapids, MI, and made a local hit with "Back Up Train" in 1967.  Then producer and band leader Willie Mitchell took him down to Memphis, where he cut his first million seller in 1971, "I'm So Tired of Being Alone."  This was just the beginning of five years of immense popular success, selling over 30 million records, collecting many awards, and becoming the biggest name in soul with hits like "Let's Stay Together" and "Take Me to the River."
 But Green had embarked on a reconversion process that began with a spiritual transformation in 1973 and culminated in the purely religious Belle Album in 1977, in which he mystically proclaims the unity of sensual and spiritual love.  A sequel, Truth and Time,  went even farther in that direction, but he still felt the pressure of popular stardom.  Not until he sustained an injury falling off the stage in 1979 did he decide once and for all to give up the pop side of his career.  He continued recording, but on the smaller Gospel labels.  His style still sounds contemporary, which bothers some pious traditionalists, but he uses it entirely in the service of communicating spirituality now.

@021 Harris, Rebert H.\ (1916- ) The driving force behind the Soul Stirrers was born in Trinity, TX, and grew up in the Methodist church. He formed a family group, The Friendly Five as a child, and composed his first Gospel song "Everybody Ought to Love His Soul" and age 8.  His high energy vocal style came from imitating birds on the Texas farm where he grew up.  He attended Mary Allen Seminary in Crockett, TX, but left in 1936 to join the Soul Stirrers, who soon moved to Houston and then to Chicago in the early 40s.
 Harris was enormously influential in the development of the Gospel quartet style. He introduced the concept of the second lead voice, which opened the vocal space which permitted voices such as Julius Cheeks, Ira Tucker and Claude Jeter to come through in their respective quartets.  He also played around with the music in new ways, adding devices which have an unmistakable stamp of modernity on them–lyric ad libs and asides, delayed time to create a grinding syncopation, antiphony and false leads. He made the Soul Stirrers the first quartet to give modern treatments to traditional tunes.  He was one of the most versatile, capable, and original vocal artists ever to find a home in Gospel, and his style is worthy of that of a jazz singer. He became the model for Sam Cooke, but then left the Soul Stirrers in 1950 because, as a happily married man, he felt their morality had been compromised by their ease at accepting liaisons with their female fans.  Once out of the Soul Stirrers, he started a group called the Gospel Paraders, where he introduced more rhythmic innovations.  He made a hit on Sam Cooke's label, the Star, called "Pass Me Not," but has not recorded since, retiring from music to work for a florist in Chicago with his wife, Jeanette.

@022 Hawkins, Edwin\ (1943-) From Oakland, CA, Hawkins grew up in the sanctified Ephesian Church of God in Christ to become one of the major figures in the crossover Gospel movement, along with Andrea Crouch and Jessy Dixon.  Fame came by chance to Hawkins.  He sang in a church choir which called themselves the Northern 
California State Youth Choir.  To raise money for their church they cut an album including the old Baptist hymn "Oh Happy Day."  They quickly sold 1500 records and then got played on an underground rock station in San Francisco.  Suddenly they were overwhelmed with recording contract offers.  They went professional, renaming themselves the Edwin Hawkins Singers, and had a worldwide hit on their hands. They played Madison Square Garden and Yankee Stadium, and began doing rock concerts and festivals, including the Playboy circuit and Las Vegas casinos.   This began to arouse opposition from their home church, and misgivings from certain of their members, including Tremaine Hawkins, wife of Edwin's brother Walter.  Yet their albums continued selling.  In 1979 the family chorus shared the stage with the National Symphony Orchestra in Washington, D.C. at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, and they soon released an album entitled Gospel at the Symphony.  Once again they felt they were reaching a wider audience with their religious message, and Rev. Walter Hawkins justifies their style saying that their ministry is to entertain with the Spirit.

@023 Jackson, Mahalia\ (1911-1972)  Although brought up in the Mount Moriah Baptist Church in New Orleans she was fascinated by the worship style of the Holiness Church next door, whose religious practices still contained vestiges of West African ceremony.  As she described it herself:  "These people had no choir or no organ.  They used the drum, the cymbal, the tambourine and the steel triangle.  Everybody there sang, and they clapped and stomped their feet and sang with their whole bodies.  They had a beat, a rhythm we held on to from slavery days, and their music was so strong and expressive,  it used to bring tears to my eyes."  She never joined that church, however, sticking rather with the Baptists. But she clearly expressed her musical preference for them:  "I liked it better than being up in the choir singing anthems. I liked to sing songs that testify to the glory of the Lord.  Those anthems are too dead and cold for me....We Baptists sang sweet...where these Holiness people tore into 'I'm So Glad Jesus Lifted Me Up! they came out with real jubilation.  I say: don't let the Devil steal the beat from the Lord!  The Lord don't like us to act dead.  If you reel it, tap your feet a little–dance to the glory of the Lord!"
 Convinced by Willie Mae Ford Smith to leave her little cosmetics business for a singing career, she eventually replaced Sallie Martin as Thomas A. Dorsey's partner–after her one year marriage ended in 1938.  She had become an established popular solo singer, making one recording in 1937, and then staying out of the studio for ten years.  She scandalized Baptist churches with her Holiness or Sanctified style, which included shouting, shaking her hips, lifting her robe an inch or two when she got excited, and even flirting onstage. Disdained at the time by the better off members of the African-American community, she appealed to the poorer masses, who flocked to hear her.  As Viv Broughton says in Black Gospel   (Dorset, UK: Blandford Press, 1985):  "She rocked them like a New Orleans ragtimer with Dorsey's 'What Could I Do?' and she made them faint dead away with his 'Precious Lord.'  She roared and shouted like a Pentecostal preacher, she moaned and growled like the old southern mothers, she hollered the gospel blues like a sanctified Bessie Smith and she cried into the Watts' hymns like she was back in a slave cabin.  The say that in her time, Mahalia Jackson could wreck a church in minutes flat and keep it that way for hours on end." (p. 54)
 Jackson returned to the studio in New York in 1946 for Apollo records, accompanied by Mildred Falls, who was to remain her accompanist for two decades after that.  The following year she recorded "Move On Up a Little Higher" in Chicago, which became her first million selling record.  But her real fame came in the 50s, first at Carnegie Hall in 1950 in a  triumphant appearance with the Black Baptist Convention, and then winning Grand Prix du Disque  in France with "I Can Put My Trust in Jesus," which led to her first European tour. When she performed in London in 1952, she became the first person to sing African American music there since the Fisk Jubilee singers eighty years before.
 By 1954 she had her own radio program out of Chicago, on the CBS affiliate WBBM, and left Apollo to sign with Columbia.  The larger company promised her much greater royalties and a wider market, but at the price of largely abandoning her black fans, since Columbia had little market experience in that field.  She changed her style, according to CBS's legendary A & R man John Hammond (discoverer of numerous jazz and pop music legends), who estimated that by her death she was playing to a 75-90% white audience and had lost the "drive and looseness" of the Apollo sides.
 But having been brought up in poverty, Jackson proved that she could be as good a business woman as artist.  She started her own chicken chain, Mahalia Jackson Chicken Dinners, which competed with Colonel Saunders, and was successful in real estate.  But she also established a scholarship fund in her own name, and was an ardent supporter of Dr. Martin Luther King, who adored her.  She stood by him in front of the 250,000 strong crowd at the March on Washington of 1963 and sang "I Been 'Buked and I Been Scorned," and she offered an unspeakably moving performance of "Precious Lord" at King's funeral in 1968, one of Gospel's finest hours.

@024 Jeter, Claude\ (1919-) Originally from Montgomery, AL, Jeter was an ordained minister as well as Gospel singer, whose specialty was a powerful falsetto.  In 1938 he organized a quartet, the Four Harmony Kings with his brother and two miners.  They moved to Knoxville, and fearing confusion with the Harmony Kings changed their name to the Silvertones, but when they acquired the sponsorship of the Swan Bakery for pioneering regular broadcasts over WBIR radio, they became the Swan Silvertone Singers, the name under which they achieved fame.  Life on the road was hard.  Jeter recalled the early days when they hardly made any money, yet worked very hard.  Tickets to see them might be 20 cents for adults; the sponsoring organization would take half of the total take of say, $40 leaving them $20 to split four ways.  By the time they paid for their overnight stay ($1 each) filled up the car, and paid other expenses, like publicity, they were down to practically nothing.  But they paved the way for other groups.
 They honed their harmonies over hundreds of radio hours in front of a single microphone, and later added hard shouting lead singers, among them Solomon Womack and Robert Crenshaw.  Their best recordings included "Savior Pass Me Not," "Jesus Remembers," and "My Rock."
 Jeter left the group in the mid-'60's to become a minister of the Church of Holiness Science in Detroit.

@025 Johnson,  Blind Willie\ (ca. 1900-1949) From near Temple, Texas. Johnson's mother died when he was a baby.  His father, a farmer, remarried a woman who, when Willie was seven years old, threw a pan of lye water at his father, and Willie happened to be in the way. As a child, his father took him to nearby Hearn on Saturdays to play and sing on the streets for tips.  Johnson met his wife Angeline in 1927 on the streets of Dallas while singing "If I Had My Way."  In 1929 Johnson came to New Orleans, sent by Elder Dave Ross, to record 15 religious records for Columbia.  While singing "If I Had My Way" in front of the Customs House in 1929 he was arrested for inciting a riot, since the song presented a dramatic version of the Samson and Delilah story with the chorus, "Oh, Lord, if I had my way, I'd tear this building down."  Columbia dropped him after his last group of recordings–in 1930–on which Angeline sang with him.  The recordings were very successful and went through a number of reissues, but he never received any money for them.  As a result he was reduced to singing on the streets of Beaumont, Texas.  A tall, heavy, dignified man, he was minister and a wonderful singer.  He attended the Mount Olive Baptist Church in Beaumont, where he played the guitar to accompany young people at evening services and often preached.  His house burned in 1949, but he and his family got out safely, although he lost his guitar.  Angeline spread newspaper over the wet bedding, and Johnson caught pneumonia.  He still went out singing for tips to support his family the next day.  When Angelina tried to get him admitted to a hospital they were turned down for lack of money and he died a week later.

@026 Ligon, Willie Joe\ Born in Troy, AL, Ligon moved to Los Angeles as a youth where he formed the Mighty Clouds of Joy, combining his own high energy lead singing with the sophisticated style of Californian Johnny Martin.  They assembled their backup men: Elmo Franklin from Florida and Richard Wallace from Georgia, soon after adding Elmo's brother Ermant and Leon Polk and David Walker. At first they sang around the poorer churches of LA, and finally made it onto the radio in 1959.  The following year Don Robey of Peacock records signed them on and they recorded "Jesus Lead Us Safely" and "Ain't Got Long Here."  Only after staying with him for more then a decade did they discover that he'd been paying them only a small fraction of the publishing royalties on their original tunes.  Meanwhile they carefully built up their reputation as one of the hardest driving male groups around, wearing high, pompadour-like hair cuts and lush mohair suits, they slept in their van but they left audiences enthralled and reeling from their wildly emotional performances, which included both songs and sermonettes "spirit-filled tales and exhortations that exploded into screaming climaxes." (Broughton, p. 87)  Their most famous sermonette was "A Bright Side," a shouting-preacher style story of a mother/son tragedy.  They recorded it live in 1964.
 The Clouds do an average of 200 concerts per year, frequently sharing the stage with world-renown secular artists.  They could have made a lot more money by going into straight R & B, but they decided to remain purely religious.  They finally left Peacock, after they realized how much was being stolen from them, and went to ABC records, where they modified their sound in a more commercial direction, while keeping the message basically the same.  They have also been very successful with European audiences.

@027 Martin, Roberta*\ (1907-1969)  Martin grew up in Helena, AR in the Baptist church.  She moved with her family to Chicago in 1917, and attended Northwestern University.  She met Thomas A. Dorsey when she was singing in the choir of the Ebenezer Baptist Church and soon became his pianist.  In 1933 she was the pianist in the Century of Progress Exhibition, and in 1935 she formed her own group, The Roberta Martin Singers, recording for the Savoy and Apollo labels, and travelling all over the world.  She became associated with the song "What a Friend We Have in Jesus," as well as her own popular Gospel song, "Try Jesus," one of over a hundred she has written.  She won the Chicago Music Association's Annual Music Merit Award for outstanding contributions to music and cultural advancement in 1965.  In 1981, 12 years after her death, she was honored by lectures and recitals at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D. C.
@028 Joel Simpson* \(1946-) Producer and writer of, and performer in The Gospel Pianist (as well as its sister program, The New Orleans Pianist), Joel Simpson was born in New Jersey November 26, 1946,  and grew up in Union.  He began playing piano at age 6 and started lessons at  8.  His interest in jazz started around age 12.  He travelled widely during and after college, including study abroad learning French, Italian and German, which later served him when he performed abroad. 
 He received a doctorate in comparative literature from Brown in 1976.  His first job was teaching English at the University of New Orleans (1973-78), which is what brought him to the Crescent City.   But in 1978 he left academia for jazz piano.  He got a job on Bourbon Street, and resigned from the University.  He also played in the theatrical production One Mo' Time ), took a variety of other jobs, including translation/interpretation (French and Italian) and compugraphics and eventually  worked in most of the major hotels in New Orleans.
    In 1980 he began a sideline as a jazz journalist writing music reviews for local publications, later becoming the Down Beat  correspondent for New Orleans.  From 1988 to 1990 he did weekly reports on jazz in New Orleans to the Italian radio network in Rome in Italian. 
  1987 was the first year he led a band in  the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival. In 1989  he made a quintet album Subterranean Sweetie  with a grant he had won for his compositions, and he put it out on his own JSS label, and in 1994 it came out on the Italian label, Beat. In 1990 his group performed at La Foire de Niort in Niort, France, and at the Pompeii Jazz Festival. In 1991 he performed an extended run in Rome with vocalist Betty Shirley, and in 1993 he made two solo jazz piano appearances in France.
 Currently he performs mainly in the New Orleans area and teaches jazz and blues improvisation at Tulane University. An article by him on New Orleans style piano appeared in the July/August 1995 issue of Piano Today. 

@029 Smith, Willie Mae Ford\ Born in 1906 in Rolling Forks, MS, but raised  in Memphis, Smith grew up in impoverished conditions with 13 brothers and sisters, sleeping four children to a bed, using their coats as covers.  Her father, a railroad brakeman by trade, was a deacon in the church and an active member of the choir, so singing came naturally to the family.   The family formed a singing quartet, which Willie Mae joined in 1922.  Their style placed as much emphasis on entertainment as on evangelizing.  
 In 1924 the quartet created a sensation at the National Baptist Convention, and it became clear that singing was to be her calling.  As much influenced by the blues à la Bessie Smith and the showmanship of Cab Calloway as the sacred tradition, Smith was undecided which musical route she would pursue until she joined the Church of God Apostolic in the late 1930s, where her energetic, fervent style found its natural setting in ecstatic Pentecostalism.  She joined Thomas A. Dorsey's Gospel movement following in the footsteps of Sallie Martin, whose emotional pitch she easily matched. But Smith also had  the powerful voice which Martin lacked, which she retained well into her eighties.
 Completely devoted to spreading the holy word, she never sang for profit and never recorded!  She belongs to a totally different musical ethos than, say, Rosetta Tharpe or Clara Ward, that is, a person who sings only to save souls and who lives entirely by the spirit.  Heilbut calls her "the greatest of the 'anointed singers'" for this reason (p. 196).
 She described her early difficulties as a Dorsey disciple in bringing the Gospel sound, a blend of blues and the sanctified style, into the church: "They said I was bringing the blues into the church. 'You might as well be Mamie Smith, Bessie Smith, one of those Smith sisters, you make me sick with that stuff,'" she quotes her opponents as saying, "Well, I said, that's all the stuff I know.  When I first started out singing Gospel they said, 'We don't want that coonshine stuff in here; we don't want ragtime singing in here,' but that didn't stop me.  I kept going because that's what the Lord wanted."
 As director of the Soloists Bureau of Dorsey's National Convention of Gospel Choirs and Choruses, she inspired a whole generation of Gospel singers, many of whom later became legends in their own right, like Edna Gallmon Cook, Myrtle Scott, Martha Bass, Brother Joe May, and the greatest of them all, Mahalia Jackson.  She became Mother Smith to them all.   She is heavily featured in the Gospel documentary Say Amen, Somebody  (1983) along with Thomas A. Dorsey.

@030 Tharpe, Sister Rosetta\ (1915-1973) Born Rosetta Nubin in Cotton Plant, AR, but raised in Chicago in the Holiness Church, where her first musical influence was that of her mother, Katie Bell Nubin (1880-1969) a travelling, singing missionary, who frequently collaborated with her daughter as a duet throughout her life. Rosetta first gained her reputation as a singer-evangelist in Miami, then moved back to Chicago and from there to New York. Her style tended to be more good-humored than passionate, instantly identifiable by her blues-influenced upbeat guitar playing.  "Grinning, joking...a million spiritual laughs, Rosetta was obvious star material." (Heilbut, p. 192)
 She made the first million selling Gospel recordings for Decca in 1938, laying down Dorsey's "Rock Me," "I Looked Down the Line," "That's All," and her own novelty "This Train."  Then she moved to New York and joined up with Cab Calloway, Lucky Millender and even Benny Goodman, bringing Gospel to the Cotton Club in Harlem (where all the performers were Black and all the patrons were white) and Café Society Downtown, favoring the lighter tunes for white audiences.  She was one of the few who managed the generic straddle between Gospel and jazz, adding a bit of religion to her jazz performance while making secular waves with tunes such as "I Want a Tall Skinny Papa"–which surprisingly didn't cost her her Gospel following.  She still played for the Black faithful in churches on Sunday, a fact which Life  magazine noted in an article on her in 1939.
 During the war only she and the Golden Gate Quartet of all the Black religious singers were issued on V-Discs, the special government issued records (V for Victory) which circulated during the recording ban (which left us without an early record of the birth of bebop).
 Then as Gospel's Golden Age began to build, she returned to religious singing exclusively, teaming up with Sanctified shouter Marie Knight of Newark, NJ in 1946, and drawing huge crowds:  17,000 in Atlanta and 27,000 in Washington, D. C. in 1950.  When she married Russell Morrison, ex-manager of the Ink Spots in 1951 her open-air Gospel wedding drew 25,000 paying guests.  She was a household word, one of the most famous names in Gospel. 
 Then when she went back out on a limb and did a blues recording, the Gospel establishment, especially her own Sanctified church, was less forgiving.  They felt betrayed by the one of their own who had made it, and they weren't going to let her back.  Marie Knight split off and tried to make it on her own as a secular singer, failing miserably and winding up as a telephone operator in Brooklyn.  No longer welcome on the strictly Gospel circuit, she began to follow in Mahalia Jackson's orbit, performing Gospel for secular and largely white audiences especially in Europe, coming to personify Gospel along with Jackson, but never being typical of the Gospel mainstream. When her mother died in 1969 she lost her spiritual rudder, and she succumbed to a stroke in 1973, fighting all the way.

@031 Tindley, Rev. Charles Albert\ (1856-1933)  Dorsey's major influence in sacred music, Tindley's hymns were the forerunners of Gospel.  With a passion for education, he taught himself to read and write by collecting scraps of paper with print on them, so that he was a fluent writer by age 17.  Moving to Philadelphia from his native Maryland, he married and worked first as a hod carrier, then as a sexton at the Bainbridge Street Methodist Episcopal Church, taking evening classes to advance his studies.  He became a minister in 1885, and worked for 17 years as an itinerant pastor, finally returning to the Bainbridge Church as its minister.  The church was renamed Tindley Temple after Tindley's death in 1933.
 Although known during his lifetime as a stirring preacher, he is best remembered as a composer of hymns.  He also developed the musical form of worship involving the whole congregation, which later became known as the "Gospel Songfest."
 From 1901 onward he wrote a significant body of hymns which were innovative in adding Black folk imagery and blues formats and moods to the hymn form, thereby addressing the African-American experience directly.   In this way he was the forerunner of the Gospel movement, yet in the hands of a capable Gospel singer and a good rhythm section they may be indistinguishable. His most famous compositions include "Storm is Passing Over," "We'll Understand It Better By and By," and the song which he called "I'll Overcome," which became the anthem of the Civil Rights Movement, "We Shall Overcome."  Tindley had not only overcome enormous disadvantages by personal courage and strength of will, he knew how to inspire others to do the same through his preaching and music.  His tunes tend to be simple, easy to learn, and apt vehicles for creative Gospel singer.

@032 Tucker, Ira\ (1925-) Originally from Spartenburg, SC, Tucker formed a group called the Gospel Carriers while he was a teenager. He joined the Dixie Hummingbirds, who had had their first hit on Decca with "Joshua Journeyed to Jericho" in 1939, after World War II and became their first tenor and lead.  They next recorded five years later for Regis-Major, this time with Tucker, and Willie Bobo, whom they had picked up from the Heavenly Gospel Singers.  After flirting with Apollo and Gotham they settled with Don Robey's Peacock label in 1952, which is where they had their greatest impact.
 The Dixie Hummingbirds were noted for their versatility and forward thinking in their harmonies, but they could also energize a song and bring down and audience with their spirit.  At a Sunday concert in Ohio a woman collapsed and died from the excess of excitement Tucker generated singing "I'm Still Living on Mother's Prayer."  They toned down their presentation after that.  
 Tucker was known for other innovations, notably the introduction of hip-slapping as a percussive technique and for stepping out of the group formation and leaping off the stage.  They became the elder statesmen of Gospel in later years, still using the lush progressive harmonies and shouting leads, but they also picked up a novelty in the pastiching of younger rivals, which they featured as "Let's Go Out to the Programs."  In 1966 they had a huge success at the Newport Jazz Festival, and have occasionally brought Paul Simon in as a guest.

@033 Ward, Clara\ (1924-1973)  Known as the Charismatic Gospel Queen, the "Tiny Dynamo," Clara Ward was introduced at the National Baptist Convention in 1943 at the age of 14 by her mother Gertrude Ward of Philadelphia.  As lead singer of the Ward Singers, Clara created the most successful female group of Gospel's golden age.  Possessed of her power as a singer, her capacity to bring audiences to extremes of emotion, Clara Ward developed a flamboyant personal style in her dress and manner to the point of spectacle.  They travelled in a limousine pulling a trailer with their gowns.  Typically, they would arrive at a church in the morning, sing one song and announce their performance that evening, where a crush would have assembled.  Little by little she yielded the limelight to co-singer Marion Williams, a Holiness singer from Miami.  Toward the end of the 1950s, Clara was running several groups of Ward singers, all decked out in outlandish outfits with bizarre wigs.  In 1958, however, Marion Williams took the main group and left Clara, becoming the Stars of Faith.  Unfazed, Clara signed a 40-week contract with a Las Vegas hotel for $200,000 in 1961, scandalizing the Gospel and religious establishment.  The contract was renewed twice.  She composed over 200 Gospel songs, carrying Gospel to Disneyland, the Tonight Show, and the Newport Jazz Festival, in addition to Las Vegas.  She was inducted into the New York Songwriters' Hall of Fame.  Although many felt she sold out, her music reached far beyond the usual Gospel audiences. 

@034 Warwick, Dionne\ (1941- ) Warwick grew up in Newark, NJ, and sang though never recorded with the Gospel group, the Drinkard Singers, along with her sister Dee Dee.  In the 1960s she began a successful association songwriters Burt Bachrach and Hal David, and scored their first hit with "Don't Make Me Over."  They had a million seller in "Anyone Who Had a Heart" in 1963 (the year her cousin Whitney Houston was born) and a second one with "Walk On By" in 1964.  Although the field of her success is popular soul music, she is a religious person and remains very active in educating people about Gospel music, believing it should be taught in the schools.  She has made GOSPEL into an acronym meaning: God's Orders Sung Portraying Everlasting Love and has written a forward to Dr. Joan Hillsman's test, The Progress of Gospel Music.  

@035 Watts, Isaac\ (1674-1748) was a dissenting English preacher from London, who published a collection of mostly original hymns in 1707.  They became the standard hymns in the colonies.  Their stark language and blunt metaphors of physical tribulation and spiritual transcendence spoke directly to the slaves' experience.  Later Spirituals developed more elaborate imagery and became part of the repertoire of Black song.  Watts is often erroneously credited with having written "Amazing Grace."  That classic was actually written by the Rev. John Newton (1725-1807) who himself spent 15 months working as a slave for a dealer in Africa before escaping to command his own slave ship for six years!  Newton later became a clergyman and collaborated with writer William Cowper in publishing the Olney Hymns  in 1779.
 Watts' hymns, along with those of Newton, Charles Wesley, the founder of the Methodist movement, William Cowper, and Lowell Mason formed the nucleus of repertoire for Protestant churches both Black and white in the US eventually giving rise to many Gospel versions, and being known collectively and generically as Dr. Watts' hymns.

@036 Williams, Marion\ (1927- ) Williams grew up in Miami, FL, in the sanctified Church of God in Christ, where she sang as a child.  She joined the Ward Singers in 1947 and remained with them until 1958, providing the vocal backbone of the group while Clara Ward supplied the panache. She broke with them to form her own group, the Stars of Faith, in 1958. She receive a MacArthur Award in 1993.
@037 Intro (1)\ Introduction by Joel Simpson. Welcome to The Gospel Pianist. You have purchased a powerful program for playing and studying a piano style that is both universally appealing and which underlies much of the blues, jazz and popular music played today. A Gospel piano background has served many African-American jazz and blues players as their home base and first style mastered, in an analogous way that classical music has served many non-Gospel oriented players, both African-American and European-American (as well as European). Gospel piano offers an extensive introduction to one- and two-handed chording, to strong left-hand accompaniment, to a wide range of moods and emotional states, and to the necessity of using one's imagination to build structures which reach high levels of emotional intensity from simple, short melodic materials: most hymns are16 bars long or less and few have bridges. For the solo pianist there is the additional challenge of using the piano's resources as dramatically as possible to make up for the absence of vocals. But of course, there's no reason why the Gospel Pianist can't sing along!

@038 Intro (2) \A Short History of Gospel Music
Overview
 The story of Gospel Music is the story of African-American religious experience.  Musically, this experience may be divided into three periods: (1) the Early period, pre-Emancipation to 1872, during which African-Americans  found roots in English sacred musical traditions and began to formulate their own musical expressions; (2) the Middle period, 1872 to 1932, when African-American music came to be known and accepted throughout the US and African-American hymn writers produced a significant body of work; and (3) the Gospel period, when African-American sacred music synthesizes its various elements, African and European to produce a music which reaches ever wider audiences, eventually becoming a popular genre, parallel to the secular genres. 

Early Period
  During the early period, worshipping alongside European Americans both as slaves and as free people in the eighteenth century, African-Americans absorbed the current musical religious trends. These originated in England, mostly from the pens of Isaac Watts and John and Charles Wesley, whose hymns fueled the "Great Awakening" of 1730 and thereafter in England and America. By the mid-nineteenth century, however, a body of religious songs particular to African-Americans had grown up. These included both adaptations of the English hymns, and original material including "sorrow songs" ("Steal Away," "Go Down, Moses," and "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot") and the more uplifting spirituals, or jubilee spirituals (e.g. "In That Great Gettin' Up Mornin'," and "Git on Board, Little chillun") which reflected the particular sufferings and joys of the people who sang them. Also called shout songs, slave songs or melodies, minstrel songs or religious songs, the music is much older than the words, going back to African sources. During the period of slavery religious services were often conducted in the so-called "invisible church," religious gatherings not officially sanctioned by the oppressive white establishment, during which these songs were created–sometimes extemporaneously–repeatedly sung and elaborated upon.  The strong musical traditions of Africa together with the faith they had acquired in the New World gave the people solace to endure the dehumanizing and degrading conditions they faced daily, year after year, and permitted them to retain their hope and dignity through the generations of oppression. Today we have approximately 6,000 extant Spirituals. 
 As for church organizations, the earliest African-American churches in the US were Methodist (Richard Allen, deacon, 1793, Philadelphia) and Methodist-Episcopal (the first Black American denomination, Richard Allen, Bishop, 1816), whose members were mostly free people in the North. During the early nineteenth century and after Emancipation, however, the Southern Baptist church gained the greatest number of adherents among African-Americans. This happened for several reasons: they were the most prevalent churches throughout the south; the churches had a loose national administrative structure; and they permitted a great deal of discretion to individual congregations. The next significant religious movement among African-Americans occurred in the 1890s. But meanwhile an event took place which forever altered the place of African-American music on the US cultural scene.

Middle Period
 Shortly after Emancipation, in 1872, Fisk University in Nashville sent out a choir of its students to raise money for the alma mater  by performing around the country.  The Fisk Jubilee Singers thus brought the Negro Spiritual tradition to the larger American public, achieving an unanticipated level of success and eventually travelling to Europe. Other colleges followed suit, notably the Hampton Institute.  Although these young college touring groups sang toned-down versions of the Spirituals, it was due to their efforts that this rich musical genre entered the larger American musical consciousness and resulted in the publication of a number of hymnals containing specifically African-American material, most notably A Collection of Revival Hymns and Plantation Melodies,  compiled by Marshall W. Taylor and published in 1883. This activity ushered in the second great period of African-American sacred music, a period of immense conscious creative development, in which Gospel music was actually forged.
  The Gospel hymn as a distinct genre began to emerge late in the century. These differed from spirituals in their greater use of imagery and simile in their lyrics and–though based on hymns from the white sacred tradition–used some degree of syncopation. One collection of these, W. Henry Sherwood's The Harp of Zion,  was adopted by the National Baptist Convention (an all African-American organization) in 1893. Yet the greatest impetus to the development of a more Africanized Gospel music was the founding and growth of the Black fundamentalist Pentecostal movement and its "holiness" or "sanctified" churches. 
 By the 1890s many African-Americans were discontented with the relative tameness of prevalent styles of worship in the established Black churches.  These people wanted a more emotional religion, one which honored African traditions more, in the enthusiastic, even ecstatic forms of worship.  They found it in the Pentecostal movement related to and contemporaneous with the white Pentecostal movement, originating in southern Appalachia and Topeka. 
 The most important African-American Holiness church was the Church of God in Christ, founded in 1895.  These churches were only loosely bound administratively to each other; many were led by lay preachers and in very modest, e.g. storefront, facilities. They found their devotees in the ghettoes of the north, where hundreds of thousands of African-Americans had migrated to during and after the First World War in search of jobs and relief from the oppressive racial discrimination of the south. While the more sophisticated, established Baptist and Methodist churches eschewed this kind of music–outwardly because of its resemblance to "crude" secular music, such as the contemporaneous ragtime and the blues, it was just these more African elements which attracted worshippers to them: the emotional pitch, the intensity of participation, the excited syncopated rhythms, and the ecstatic, altered state rituals, including speaking in tongues, shaking, even fainting.  
 Meanwhile the body of specifically African-American religious music had grown to such an extent that by the turn of the century the first African-American hymnal appears, compiled by the famous Rev. Dr. Charles Albert Tindley (1856-1933, see Biographies) pastor of the Tindley Temple United Methodist Church in Philadelphia. Tindley was the most prolific of African-American hymn writers, and included many of his own works in his hymnal. Its great influence came after the First World War, when Tindley's works helped inspire pianist Thomas A. Dorsey (1899-1993, see Biographies) to abandon his secular blues and vaudeville playing and devote himself to religious music exclusively. Tindley's songs, inspired by the spirituals, founded a new genre: the Gospel hymn. Drawing from Biblical sources, proverbs and folk images, Tindley's lyrics exhort the believer to greater faith in God and hope in the future: "Courage, my soul, and let us journey on," he writes ("The Storm Is Passing Over") and "If you trust and never doubt/He will surely bring you out/Take Your Burden to the Lord and Leave It There;" and most famous of all, "If in my heart I do not yield/I'll Overcome Some Day," which became the anthem of the Civil Rights movement "We Shall Overcome."
 The Sanctified churches already called their music Gospel music, so named because many of the lyrics came straight from the first four books of the New Testament. Its vigor attracted many young members of Baptist churches in the early years of the twentieth century, among them Thomas A. Dorsey.  Dorsey was a pianist as adept at the blues as he was at church music.  Although he had his conversion experience in 1923, he later performed with Ma Rainey using the sobriquet Georgia Tom.

Gospel Period
   Nonetheless it was he who, together with his energetic singing assistant Sallie Martin persuaded the National Baptist Convention of 1932 in Chicago to accept the more enthusiastic music of the Sanctified churches, which he called Gospel.  That date marks the next turning point in Gospel's history.  Thereafter it becomes a national phenomenon among African-Americans, with singing groups spawning all the time, many of them giving concert tours on a shoestring.
 This third or Gospel period may be subdivided into three periods: (1) the Formative period, 1932-1945; (2) the Golden Age, 1945-1960 and (3) the Contemporary period, 1960 to the present.
 During the Formative period under the influence of Dorsey, Lucie Campbell, William H. Brewster and Roberta Martin Gospel music became an integral part of the worship of most African-American churches. Dorsey travelled from town to town with his assistant at the time (a line which went from Sallie Martin to Willie Mae Ford Smith to Mahalia Jackson and kept going) giving a performance and selling copies of his songs in the hopes that congregations would accept them. In addition, solo vocalists and singing groups from duets to septets, but mostly quartets, toured, singing in churches, often making very little money. Meanwhile the record industry increased its awareness of Gospel music, which began to sell in numbers comparable to and sometimes exceeding secular music. Most instrumental accompaniment was on piano at this time, with some guitar. It was during this period that Sister Rosetta Tharpe became the first person to sell a million Gospel records in 1937.
 During the Golden Age of Gospel the vocal quartet was predominant ensemble and the organ became the accompaniment instrument of choice. The Hammond organ, developed by American inventor Laurens Hammond in 1935, was the first practical electric organ that could simulate the sound of a pipe organ. It gradually became a fixture of African-American churches, and from there a jazz instrument. Famous quartets included the Golden Gate Quartet, the Clara Ward Singers, the Soul Stirrers, the Might Clouds of Joy, and the Fabulous Nightingales, among many others. During this period church people still frowned on Gospel artists performing secular material or outside of religious contexts. In the early 50s Rosetta Tharpe and Sam Cooke both very successful Gospel performers, were ostracized by the religious community after they had made forays into popular music. 
 During the Contemporary period religious and generic barriers have faded, as the pop music called Soul, Gospel's stylistic secular alter ego gained masses of fans and more and more Gospel artists were able to perform in both popular and religious contexts. This was aided by pop singer Paul Simon's embracing of Gospel as a musical genre, recording Andrae Crouch's "Jesus Is the Answer" and appearing onstage with the Dixie Hummingbirds. Gospel artists have appeared on the same stages as blues and pop artists at festivals world-wide and this hasn't hurt their acceptance by religious audiences. 
 The stylistic crossover during this period appears clearly if we compare Ray Charles to Andrae Crouch. Charles, the "Father of Soul Music," is a Gospel singer according to every stylistic standard, but according to no religious ones: his subject matter is entirely secular, while he is a master of the vocal and piano style of the Gospel tradition (as well as many other traditions, but this is the one where he has achieved the greatest popular success). Crouch, on the other hand, is stylistically a pop singer whose material is religious. Now although this has been a period of much stylistic crossover, the musical traditions established during Gospel's Golden Age still remain strong within the religious community.

@039 Intro (3)\Learning Gospel Style Piano Using The Gospel Pianist

 Gospel is primarily a vocalist's art.  Yet a very distinctive piano style has developed around it, which has proven a lush source of rhythmic inspiration to jazz.  As Ray Charles says, 

"A Gospel music background is important to a jazz musician for it draws out feeling.  What you speak of as soul  in jazz is soul  in Gospel music.   The important thing in jazz is to feel your music, but really  feel it and believe it–the way a Gospel singer like Mahalia Jackson obviously feels and believes the music she is singing, with her whole body and soul." 

 The Gospel pianist has two tasks above and beyond the straight playing of the music.  First he or she must create an inspirational mood, which varies along a spectrum from stately to ecstatic; and second the pianist must be inventive enough to take the simple tunes of Gospel and vary them enough to move the listener to peaks of emotion.  The tunes are necessarily simple, since they are hymn-like songs–a congregation of non-professionals must be able to remember them and maybe even read them from the hymnals.  Yet this simplicity invites the performer, whether vocalist or instrumentalist, to invest more of himself or herself into the performance than he or she would be able to do with a more complex melody. The performer is compelled to be inventive, and with this comes increased expression. Either this, or the performance will end up repetitive and monotonous.

Techniques
 The artists in this program illustrate this principle quite well. Listen to the selections observing how the artists use the techniques and devices listed below. Copy and learn the ones that appeal to you and that you can handle. Influenced by the four-part writing of hymnals, the most characteristic Gospel piano sound is that of chordal melodic playing. Harmony changes with every melody note, and a Gospel player should be adept at doing this with the right hand alone. Alternatively the outer, usually octave, notes of a chord may change while the inner notes remain the same. The Gospel pianist should also be adept at two-handed chordal playing in open structures and in block chords. In the former, the second note from the top of a chord voicing is dropped an octave (or sometimes two) and played as a single note (or as an octave) in the left hand. 
 The most characteristic lick of Gospel piano is the I-IV-I turn, in which the I's are second inversion triads and the IV is in first inversion, or the I's in root position and the IV in second inversion; or the I's in first inversion and the IV in root position (same top melody note). Also note the role of repeated notes and chords. These attract attention, add importance, and solemnity or excitement, depending on the context. After this come the many licks which have made their way into blues piano. 
 In general, Gospel chords are simpler than blues or jazz chords, purer, with fewer alterations and extension. Sammy Berfect calls these purer chords "sacred" chords. But Derrick Bethune uses very contemporary sounding chords in his original tune in this collection, "What a Fellowship."
 Berfect also shows how single note playing, with chords ending phrases can be extremely effective, especially as enhanced with the judicious use of arpeggios (e.g. "No Not One" and "Keep Me Every Day"). He also illustrates how a call and response pattern may be represented on the piano by alternating registers ("We Praise Thee, O God").
 Blues scales and patterns, with their delicious dissonances, and profound evocation of lived-out tribulation, can offer a refreshing contrast to the staid beauty of the "sacred" chords. Berfect uses them sparingly, but Henry Butler and Davell Crawford make fairly liberal use of them, sometimes to the point of suggesting a dialogue between the sacred and the secular.
 As for the left hand, as a rule it must be strong and deep, especially in solo Gospel playing. Deep bass single notes or octaves are a necessity to provide a strong rhythmic underpinning, especially since so much of the harmonic work is done by the right hand with its chordal melodies. Note Butler's use of walking bass lines in "Will the Circle Be Unbroken" and "Go Tell It on the Mountain" among others, Bethune's in "Trouble in My Way," a very bluesy song, and Crawford's in "Oh How I Love Jesus," and "Have Thine Own Way, Lord," among others. Henry Butler walking bass is especially effective in that he frequently uses very short pick-up notes which drive the music forward with great energy.
 
 To use this program to learn the Gospel style, we recommend that you begin by studying Jon Cleary's lessons in Gospel settings.  Each one treats a single side of Gospel piano playing, and once you master one you can apply it to any Gospel melody in its tempo and time signature range. Next try learning some of Sammy Berfect's chording techniques, as well as observing well how to evoke the spiritual tranquillity he achieves in his slower performances.  
 To begin to learn to play a walking bass or a broken octave boogie style bass practice slowly (preferably with a metronome on beats 2 and 4) with a repeating pattern of no more than two measures. When you add a simple chordal pattern in the right hand, start back even more slowly. Gradually work up speed, then lengthen the left hand pattern; add more material in the right hand, etc. Next try a simple melody in the right hand over your left hand ostinato. A written out blues bass pattern is a good thing to try at this stage. Note, however, how much of Henry Butler's dazzling feats of hand separation are done over a simple repeating left hand walking bass pattern or broken octave ostinato! Analyse Butler's left hand patterns and try them slowly, then combine them with right hand material as suggested above. Also consult Louise Rose's left hand pattern towards the end of her original tune "I Believe Him."
 Finally, observe carefully how the artists on this program structure their performances to achieve a variety of effects. All of the artists employ principles of growth to hold the listener's interest and intensify the effect of the music.  Notice how Louise Rose uses occasional touches of blues, jazz harmonies and swing to energize her performances. Watch how Davell Crawford uses contrast to surprise and uplift the listener, and notice how Berfect achieves growth more slowly, taking his time to infuse the music into deeper and deeper levels of the listener's consciousness.
        Joel Simpson

 The Gospel Pianist Glossary 

@040 xAnthem\ The anthem was originally developed in the Anglican church, as the English-language counterpart of the Roman Catholic Latin motet, a polyphonic choral work without accompaniment. Early American tune books, whose contents were imported from England, contained some anthems. Native composers imitated their style (for example, William Billings) and developed greater variety and improved quality. A strong American market developed for anthems in Protestant churches, both Black and white. Several 19th century publishers concentrated solely on them. The term anthem has eventually come to mean any brief choral piece used in a religious service, in contrast to a hymn, which can be written as a single melodic line, or even adapted from a popular song (as Ma rtin Luther did).

@041  xBaptist Church\ "The democratic, informal, Scripture-centered, relatively untheological mode of Baptist service was ideal for any unsettled, rural, or frontier situation," writes Langdon Gilkey in the Grollier Encyclopedia. Thus the Baptist church attracte d many African-Americans after the Civil war, soon outdistancing the membership of the more formalized African Methodist Episcopal Church, which had been established by Richard Allen in 1787. More American Blacks belong to Baptist churches than to any other denomination, but during the 19th and early 20th century this church tended to be more conservative in its forms of worship, following more closely to white church models than the more Afrocentric Sanctified or Holiness churches, which sprang up in the 1890s. Yet the Black Baptist Church, with its national conventions represented the mainstream of African American religion by sheer force of numbers if nothing else. So it was acceptance by their convention in 1932 at the urging of Thomas A. Dorsey, which formally established the legitimacy of gospel music, even though the ecstatic forms of this music had been present in the Sanctified churches for quite some time. "demolish a place." To have a very successful Gospel performance.

@042 xFisk Jubilee Singers\ These brave, adventuresome students from Fisk University of Nashville, TN, tour the US beginning in 1871 to raise money for their alma mater. They were successful beyond their expectations. This became the vehicle for the spread of Negro Spirituals to the world beyond the African-American community and into mainstream American culture, although the versions they sung were somewhat toned down.

@043 xGlossolalia\ Also called "speaking in tongues," is the phenomenon in which people having an intense spiritual experience spout organized gibberish, often falling down in the process. It is most commonly a feature of worship in Sanctified or Holiness Church events Black and white, whether prayer services or revivals.

@044 xGolden Age of Gospel. \ca. 1945-1960. The Golden Age was characterized by large numbers of travelling Gospel singing groups which had successful recordings, and who played in churches, concert halls and arenas around the country, often rivaling and even surpassing secular music in record sales, although virtually absent from the mainstream media. Gospel Chorus. The first Black Gospel Chorus was established in 1931 by Theodore Frye and Thomas A. Dorsey. Afterwards it was to become a major form of expression for this music. Holiness Church. See Sanctified Church. "house wrecker." A highly successful Gospel number. "judgment." High flowing spirits among a crowd of worshippers during a Gospel performance, usually in a church.

@045 xLanguage, descriptive\ The language used to describe the power of Gospel music in the African American community is frequently highly metaphorical, containing strong imagery, and usually pretty clear in meaning. This glossary contains some sample expressions among the many thousands, which are being added to every day. "leave nothin' standing, not even dust." To have a very successful performance, usually in a church. Migration North. During the First World War and immediately thereafter tens of thousands of African Americans left the south for the industrial cities of the north where they found good paying jobs in stock yards, steel mills, packing houses and auto manufacturing. The Black population of Chicago increased one and one-half times between 1910 and 1920, while that of Detroit increased six times over the same period. More than 50,000 Black migrants arrived in Chicago between 1915 and 1919. It wasn't quite the promised land, however. Horrendous race riots sparked by vigilante groups burst out in the major cities, 25 in 1919 alone, the worst of which was in Chicago, where 23 Black people were killed, 600 injured, and around 1000 families burned out of their h omes.

@046 xMethodist Episcopal Church\ Established by Richard Allen (1760-1831), born to slave parents in Philadelphia, PA, when Black worshippers were expelled from the St. George's Methodist Church in 1787 and under Allen's leadership organized the Free African Society. In 1793 this society became Bethel Church, an independent Methodist church. In 1799 Allen was ordained a deacon, the first Black man regularly ordained to the ministry of the Methodist Church. In 1816 representatives of a number of Black Methodist churches met in Philadelphia and organized the African Methodist Episcopal Church as the first national Black denomination and chose Allen as their bishop. During his ministry he involved the church in various social issues, including the antislavery movement. He died in Philadelphia in 1831.

@047 xProfessionalization of Gospel\ By 1938 with the record sales in the millions, quartets and solo singers began to employ managers and conduct business in a more professional manner. Race Records. Established in 1925 as a division of Columbia, it later became a generic term for music that sold primarily to the African American market. Sanctified Church. Also called Holiness church, they first flourished in the 1890's as a response to the more conservative, straight-laced Baptist, Methodist and Methodist Episcopal Black churches, which musically remained much closer to the white Protestant tradition. The most important of the Sanctified churches, the Church of God in Christ, was established in 1895. The Sanctified churches encouraged more external and physical expression of emotion during worship, favoring spontaneous testifying, harkening back to and conserving authentic African worship practices, which had survived nearly three centuries of attempts to suppress them. Women can be preachers in Holiness churches, but not in Baptist churches. The Gospel movement drew inspiration directly from the more ecstatic style of worship of these churches as well as from Black secular sources such as the blues, both of which were closer to African traditions than the Protestant hymnody of Drs. Watts and Wesley. The official acceptance of the more rhythmic and ecstatic Gospel music by the National Baptist Convention in 1932 following the work of Thomas A. Dorsey marked a watershed in the music's history and its joining of the mainstream, but it had existed well before in the Sanctified churches. Sallie Martin, Dorsey's first collaborator came from a Sanctified church as did Sister Rosetta Tharpe. 

@048 xSolo singers\ Although most Gospel music during its Golden Age was propagated in groups, a number of solo singers gained prominence, among them Madame Edna Gallman Cooke, Bessie Griffin, Brother Joe May, Rev. Cleophus Robinson, Mother Mattie Moss Clark, Professor Charles Taylor, Rev. Robert Ballinger, James Cleveland, and best known of all, Sister Rosetta Tharpe (see biographies). "song for Sister Fluke." A hit Gospel number.

@049 xSpiritual\ Generally included the religious songs of African-Americans, especially those first recognized by white society in the 19th century. They were associated with work, recreation, and religious gatherings. They mix African musical traditions with European folk traditions, conserving such African tendencies as the call-and-response pattern with unison singing, pentatonic scales and flatted sevenths. These latter tendencies may also be found in the "white spirituals" of the rural South, which suggests that some of the influence may have gone from the blacks to the whites. Many of the text references in Black spirituals, as well as borrowed tune-fragments, show a debt to the Anglo-European hymnody and folk sources already being used in Black churches. During the 19th century Blacks attended revivals and camp meetings in great numbers, although they were segregated. Here they picked up more musical ideas, which they modified according to their own traditions, adding for example, text repetitions, responsive singing and strong rhythms, which made possible the creation of instant unrehearsed arrangements. "tear up a place" to have a very successful performance. "time for church to be dismissed." High spirits during a Gospel performance, usually in a church. 

@
