@001 I Surrender All (Judson W. Van de Venter 1855-1939, Winfield S. Weeden 1847-1908) Beautiful hymn in 3/4 which rolls easily along, punctuated by short chords.  Note the effective use of a tenor line melody towards the middle. Pianist: Sammy Berfect.
@002 I'm Changed and I Know That It Is Real. A gorgeous original Gospel ballad by Sammy Berfect. As always, observe how carefully he brings out the melodic voice, whether in the treble or the tenor voice. He is completely in control of the foregrounding and backgrounding of lines and accompaniment. Pianist: Sammy Berfect.
@003 Keep Me Every Day (Traditional) An adagio meditation, a personal prayer bringing out the richness in the simple beauty of pure harmonies. The melody is in single notes during the first chorus, with chords and arpeggios ending phrases. The second time through Berfect plays a two-handed melody three octaves apart, with arpeggios ending phrases, except at the form boundaries, where he uses chords. Half-way through this chorus he switches to singe octaves and richer, more frequent chording. Notice Berfect's use of pauses in this ad lib tempo arrangement, which effectively deepens the listener's perceptions of the sustained harmonies, as well as deepening the musical/spiritual experience as a whole. Pianist: Sammy Berfect.
@004 No Not One (By Johnson Oatman, Jr. and George C. Hugg) A languorous tune of exceptional beauty, which Berfect maximizes by foregrounding a single line melody, with rich "sacred" chords coming at the end of phrases. He gradually builds in richness, first by playing the melody in octaves and then by modulating, finally taking a brief excursion into more contemporary harmonies before coming to a deepening coda. A rich spiritual adagio. Pianist: Sammy Berfect.
@005 We Praise Thee, O God (Traditional) A jaunty, upbeat assertion of faith in moderate tempo, in which the call-and-response pattern of African song and worship is clear throughout. This is an excellent example of the chordal melodic playing which is typical of the classic Gospel style. Pianist: Sammy Berfect.
@006 Amazing Grace (John Newton, 1765) Derrick Bethune gives this classic a fresh arrangement here: a powerful, harmonically rich, forcefully moving performance. Note especially the blues fills, the sophisticated chordal transitions and the refreshing modulation halfway through. Pianist: Derrick Bethune
@007 His Eye Is on the Sparrow (Civilla D. Martin 1904:) A contemporary r & b feel bordering on Latin/rock lends Bethune's treatment of this classic an appealing originality. He makes it a excellent study of chordal melodic playing against a syncopated bass with "push" 16th notes. Pianist: Derrick Bethune
@008 The Saints (1896, James Black, words by: Katherine E. Purvis) Bethune's driving treatment of this classic strongly evokes the spirit of a full-blown revival, with its walking octaves and jubilee blues phrases.  Percussive throughout, it's hard to keep one's feet from moving to the compelling rhythm. Pianist: Derrick Bethune
@009 Trouble in  My Way (Traditional) This traditional spiritual is given a bouncy bluesy treatment here, with walking bass. Most of the melody is chordal, and this eventually gives way to an even bluesier single line. Pianist: Derrick Bethune
@010 What a Fellowship. (Derrick Bethune original) Driving contemporary soul/Gospel sound with a compelling A section and effectively contrasting B section, it is Bethune's best example of chordal melodic playing with octave bass. Pianist: Derrick Bethune

@011 At the Cross (Isaac Watts, 1707) A straightforward, driving rendition of this classic hymn. Butler combines single note melody and chord, using the chords to end phrases. The walking bass is the motor force of the tune, pushing it forward through the use of 16th note upbeats. The blues flavor peaks through in occasional fills. Pianist: Henry Butler
@012 By and By (We'll Understand It Better By and By) (by Charles Albert Tindley, ca. 1906) The lyrics to this latter day hymn come from I Cor. 13:12. Here it receives a very solid treatment with a strong walking bass and chordal melody. The unmistakable Gospel feel derives from the underlying suggestion of 12/8 rhythm, which appears in the double upbeats in the bass line and in the triplet fills in the treble, although there is more than a hint of the blues here too. Pianist: Henry Bulter.
@013 Go Tell it on the Mountain (This traditional spiritual dates from 1865 and was adapted in its familiar form by John W. Work, Jr. in 1907.  It became one of the anthems of the Civil Rights Movement.) There is a strong 12/8 feel to this rendition, which comes out especially on the fills. Butler offers a stirring performance of this historically significant tune, with some interesting variations on the verse. His coda, though is full of surprises, beginning with a false cadence and continuing through a Beethovenesque chordal rise to a brief reprise of the melody before the final cadence. Pianist: Henry Butler.
@014 Jesus on the Mainline. Traditional. Swinging bluesy feel to this traditional tune, which bears more than a little resemblance to "Gotta Travel on." Note the surging left hand scale toward the beginning as an effective alternative type of fill and the Gospel bluesy chordal melody. Butler goes into an exciting broken-octave boogie woogie then builds suspense with a repeated note figure finally leads back to the original theme and a blues/jazz ending. Pianist: Henry Butler.
@015 Lord, I Want to Be a Christian in My Heart (Traditional) Butler offers a majestic treatment of this solemn hymn of commitment, building slowly in power and grandeur, using ascending/descending arpeggios to add scope and grace notes to add character. He ends with an intriguing coda figure in parallel chromatic fourths. Pianist: Henry Butler.
@016 Only Hope We Have Is in Jesus, The. (Traditional) Butler opens with a forthright andante statement of theme then doubles the melodic rhythm to build momentum in the second chorus. He adds a surprise modulation and a brief excursion into tantalizing dissonance, then through a bravado descending two-hand figure leads back to the final statement of theme and a contemporary sounding ending. Pianist: Henry Butler. 
@017 Steal Away to Jesus (Traditional Spiritual, ca. 1871) A soul-stirring version of this classic in ad lib tempo. Butler opens with a highly dramatic main-title-movie theme section, using octave/fourth/fifth chords over a tremolo pedal. The thematic statement is in full chords with arpeggio washes, with a continuous nod to the stately, secular religious American folk sound which Aaron Copeland made such extensive use of. Butler masterfully keeps the mood shifting between solemnity and triumph and ends in deep tranquillity. Pianist: Henry Butler. 
@018 What a Friend We Have in Jesus (1876, music by: Char. Crozat Converse, words by: Horatius Bonar) A joyous, swinging performance, peppered with virtuoso fills and left hand wonders from the r & b quiver of dramatic devices, with frequent reference to the blues. Butler puts in one his false cadences at the beginning of the coda and takes us on a quick harmonic excursion to conclude a minor third lower than the original key. Pianist: Henry Butler.
@019 When I Lay My Burdens Down. (Traditional) This bravado performance begins as a "travellin'" piece in 2/4 time with a broken-octave boogie bass. After the initial energetic statement of theme, however, Butler launches into a dance-rifflike middle section over a single chord that builds in intensity, becoming more and more bluesy at the same time. After a brief return to the melody of the tune, the riff reappears in double-time over a four-note walking bass ostinato, bringing the emotional level up to extreme excitement, making this an appropriate version in a Pentecostal or "sanctified" context. The ending is on a jazz chord. Pianist: Henry Butler.
@020 Will the Circle Be Unbroken. (Traditional) The very recognizable theme first appears in 2/4 over moving, often dissonant, half-note chords in the left hand à la Aaron Copeland. This leads to a right hand ostinato of a four-note descending pattern under which the left hand plays the melody. Finally the conventional statement of theme breaks through over a swinging walking bass in 4/4. Butler takes us gradually into a more active left hand: the walking bass becomes a broken octave boogie bass, among the other left hand wonders of this piece, before we return to the right hand ostinato section, this time with an even stronger left hand melody, in octaves. We are never far from the blues in this performance. The final statement of the theme returns us to the initial device of half-note left hand chords moving through a consonant/dissonant cycle in 2/4, now leading to an orchestrally modulating coda. Pianist: Henry Butler.
@021 I Want Jesus to Walk with Me (Traditional) Butler takes this somber minor-key hymn and transforms it into a powerful polyphonic statement, contemporary in its harmonies, fueled from below. It is a four-hand overdub treatment, with the melody in octaves in the upper register, and the surging accompaniment a molten force surging up out of the deep bass, evolving upward with assertive syncopations. This is Gospel piano at its most stirringly powerful. Pianist: Henry Butler.
@022 Lord, Here Me Cryin'  by Henry Butler. The blues tradition is very close to the Gospel tradition, and both draw off of each other, occasionally coming quite close to the other. If the blues speaks about pain and suffering, then Gospel music speaks about the answer in faith. 	This slow blues talks of troubles and appeals to the Lord to hear them. But the appeal stops short of affirmation or comfort, and therein lies the emotional distinction between blues and Gospel. Notice how the trills evoke a wail-a voice crying out in pain- and how the phrases which end the trills give meaning and strength to them. The bass meanwhile, maintains a slow amble, but not a repeating boogie pattern. The two improvised choruses make progressively less use of the trill, first adding high triplet fourths as an alternative crying-out motif, then virturally abandoning the repeating patterns for one chorus, until the return to the original melody with its wailing trills. Pianist: Henry Butler
@023 Amazing Grace (1765, John Newton) Cleary opens with a solemn, ponderous statement of melody in deep, rich chords, then  gradually moves into higher registers where he reduces the harmonic density and increases the melodic density, to the point of bursting into rich descending blues line. About half way through he modulates leading to a rallentando, thence to yet another modulation leading to a simple restatement of the original theme and a simple arpeggio ending. Pianist: Jon Cleary.
@024 I Must Be with Jesus ( Jon Cleary original) An up-tempo shouting, clapping, joyous piece in the Sanctified Gospel tradition. Much of the charm comes from Cleary's use of contrasting registers, a practice which reaches a high point when we hear blues phrases in the right hand at the top of the piano, while the left hand continues its strong walking bass. Cleary begins and ends with slow, out of tempo sections. Pianist: Jon Cleary.
@025 Just a Closer Walk with Thee (Traditional) A tour de force  of stylistic variety for this chestnut. Cleary begins in a dirge which is just barely out of tempo, that is, goes in an out in a not unpleasant manner; he seems to be heading into an interlude, but actually it's the end of the section, and after a pause we hear the New Orleans style call to attention (usually associated with "Second Line" or "Joe Avery's Blues"), but second line is exactly what he's going to invite us to do. The body's been buried, and it's a parade all the way back from the cemetery to the deceased's favorite bar. The theme returns in march/dance tempo with a variety of New Orleans style r & b figures in the right and left hands, only to slow down again at the coda which subtly shifts into 3/4 tempo. Cleary illustrates a variety of uses of tremolo in this piece. Pianist: Jon Cleary.

@026 Lesson I: Style: shouting, clapping, with chordal lines in the right hand and broken octaves with even eighth notes in the left. Pianist: Jon Cleary.
@027 Lesson II: Style: Blues walk with broken octaves in the bass and swing eighth notes. Pianist: Jon Cleary.
@028 Lesson III: Style: deep swaying, in 6/4, with typical neighbor chord embellishments and walking tenths. Pianist: Jon Cleary.
@029 Lesson IV: Style:  romping, hand-clapping, get-up-and-celebrate, upbeat shuffle, which draws strongly from the rhythm and blues idiom. Pianist: Jon Cleary.

@030 Blessed Assurance (19th century hymn by Fanny Crosby & Phoebe P. Knapp) Most of this performance is in a solemn mood, out of time with stately chords. Intensity builds in the second chorus, but just before things get to heavy Crawford launches into a brief jazz excursion -in time- only to return to the original tranquil mood which brings us to the coda: a trick harmonic ending. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@031 Down By the Riverside. (Traditional) A tour de force performance by Davell Crawford of this chestnut. The intro is a brief fast shuffle leading to a statement of theme above a walking bass. Crawford modulates into the next chorus and then modulates again into the third one, staying there for the blues-tinged improvisations. A jazzy version, Crawford alternates between walking bass and boogie bass, especially the 1-5/1-6 pattern throughout the tune. Crawford launches into a series of multiple tags, leading to an extended one, in which he builds energy until he bursts forth with the original theme again. The walking bass/boogie alternation returns, then yields to a brief stride section which concludes with a false ending, leading back to the theme once more. Again, multiple false endings, this time descending, leading to an extended jazzy coda. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@032 God Be with You (1883, music by William Gould Tanner; words by Jeremiah Eaves Rankin) This hymn typically serves as the closing theme to the religious service. Treated in a straightforward manner as a stately two-beat march, Crawford illustrates the use of the repeated chord throughout this performance. A good place to start learning Gospel piano. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@033 Have Thine Own Way, Lord. (1907, words by Adelaide A. Pollard; music by George C. Stebbins) This popular hymn receives a bravado treatment here.  Beginning with an out of tempo introduction, Crawford launches into a spiritual ballad in triple time (the original time signature is 9/4). He alternates between high-style Gospel playing on one hand, with moving open-position chords, and lapidary repeated chords, and "dirty" blues figures straight out of the New Orleans r & b style, which begin to appear towards the middle of the performance. These excursions intensify, moving into an unmistakably jazzy idiom, continually alternating with highly dramatic gestures, which become more and more extravagant, in descending octaves, or ascending two-handed chords. All this makes for stirring dramatic contrasts in an enormously captivating and elaborate rendition of this simple hymn tune.  Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@034 I Will Trust in the Lord (Traditional) A stylistic survey tour de force,  this tune, reminiscent of the Scots classic "If You Take the High Road," begins with an unaccompanied single line which soon acquires harmonic company, as the harmonic thickness broadens out until a full chord version is reached. Then a quick rhythmic modulation brings us squarely into a swinging jazz version with syncopation, walking bass and jazz harmonies, after which Crawford takes us a step further with a stride bass. Note the effective use of parallel right hand chords in the jazz section which introduce quick passing dissonances. The closing theme brings us back to the stately opening version, but with a high register melody thrown in for variety.  We end in an overflow of tremolos. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@035 Is Your All on the Alter (by Elisha A. Hoffman 1839-1829) Crawford transforms this classic into showcase for the Gospel chordal style in a rock ballad feel. Note his use of a syncopated pedal bass towards the beginning and he excursions into blues style towards the middle. The repeated note here as elsewhere creates dramatic emphasis. His extended coda uses a descending chord figure which is just about to become a litany before it slows down into a calm chordal ending, but don't assume you know what's going to happen before you've heard Crawford's blues surprise at the very end. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@036 Just a Closer Walk with Thee (Traditional) This extremely familiar New Orleans funeral march chestnut demands an original treatment and gets it here in a grand manner. Crawford leads us all over the stylistic lot, always surprising us with what lies around the next turn. From a dramatic ad lib tempo intro into a delicate first statement of theme he takes us through successive intensifications relieved by playful bluesy and dissonant jazz excursions-almost as if the cortege has to pass divers groups of revelers on the way to the cemetery, and some of the mourners just can't resist joining them for a block. Note the effective use of extended repeated figures to create suspense: double octaves towards the middle and alternating right hand thirds in the coda. Ends with a satisfyingly lush descending blues line. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@037 Kum Ba Yah. This traditional African American spiritual means "Come by here" and invites God into the presence of the worshipper. Crawford begins simply, lightly, almost polyphonically, then takes us into a heavy chordal second chorus with occasional reharmonization. He seems to arrive at a coda, but beyond lies a blues-tinged march, with an unmistakable Gospel cadence at the end (of the third chorus), leading us to an even more Gospel-style fourth chorus. The chords in the next chorus skirt jazz harmonies, and he modulates into the sixth and again into the seventh chorus staying in this mode. A tag ending takes us via yet another modulation to the gentle eighth chorus, where he ends as he began, but not before a double tag, the second one extended into a Schubert-like theme which leads us to a new key and out. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@038 Oh, How I Love Jesus.  (Based on a traditional American melody; made into a hymn in 1855 by Frederick Whitfield) Here it begins as a swaying stately hymn and evolves into swinging blues-tinged Gospel/jazz waltz, ending once again with calm solemnity, following an extended coda with many tags.  Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@039 Sweet Hour of Prayer (By William B. Bradbury, 1861, to words from 1845 by William Walford) After a delicate beginning Crawford replays the theme with great and solemn assertiveness, using repeated chords to add to the solemnity. This continues all the way to the extended coda which features a remarkable two-handed tremolo section leading to a lighthearted jazz tag ending. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@040 Swing Low, Sweet Chariot (Traditional) The words of this African-American spiritual are a Biblical verse from 2nd Kings 2:11. Crawford's treatment of this classic takes the form of relaxed, bouncy straightforward 3/4 tune, which much dialogue between the hands. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@041 Wade in the Water (Traditional) This spiritual begins simply and movingly, with great solemnity.  It evolves into a contemporary section, with climbing fourth chords, then finally returns to a traditional setting, with all its initial seriousness but with even greater power.  The coda includes a brief excursion into a lighter zone before the highly appropriate conclusion. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@042 What a Friend We Have in Jesus (1876, Music by Charles Crozat Converse; words by Horatius Bonar) Crawford offers up an ironic treatment of thus classic tune: a bouncy stride setting with fills in which he presents a dialogue between the hands. There is liberal use of bluesy grace notes, some engaging ascending diminished chord fills. After one complete AABA run-through he launches briefly into a walking bass in a reprise of the bridge, flirts in passing with some jazzy chords, then returns to stride for the last A section, which he begins with an improvisation, but ends with the original melody. Typical ending: two tags and double octave figure to #11 chord. Pianist: Davell Crawford.
@043 Yes, Jesus Loves Me (Wm. B. Bradbury, 1816-1868) Stately treatment in 6/8 of this classic. Serious chords mark the beginning. The second chorus takes the melody an octave higher. The coda features two tags then extends itself dramatically to offer the most original part of this rendition. Pianist: Davell Crawford. 
@044 Amazing Grace (John Newton, 1765) Rose delivers this classic in masterful form, carefully shaping the energy level at all times. She opens with a majestic statement of theme, which she then embellishes in the second chorus. In the third chorus she builds suspense by repeating a familiar Gospel lick and then finally resolving it in a joyous concolusion. Her fourth chorus takes the energy from that point and broadens it out. The fifth chorus brings the energy down again with a stop-time beginning leading to a repeating call-and-response tag, the final energy build up before the tremolo ending gently brings the listener down. Pianist: Louise Rose.
@045 Balm in Gilead (Traditional) A gorgeous, meditative spiritual in which Rose takes the space to touch many musical bases: jazz harmonies, baroque turns, New Age phrases-all within a tranquilizing Gospel setting. Pianist: Louise Rose.
@046 Every Time I Feel the Spirit (Traditional) A lively get-up-and-shout spiritual. Notice how syncopation and accentuation moves the piece forward, especially in the two-handed chord sections. This is also a good example of an octave bassline driven foward with anticipated notes much of the time. As usual, Rose is master of dynamic effects. Pianist: Louise Rose
@047 Give me that Old Time Religion (Traditional) A masterful demonstration of what can be done with an 8-bar tune without straying far from the melody. Rose begins with two choruses in stop time, followed by two with a syncopated walk-up bass during which she gradually gets more elaborate. Then an abrupt modulations lands us into a trenchantly bluesy pair of choruses, which ends in another modulation into a travelin' boogie style. This only last a single chorus before it modulates into the last chorus in standard chords style, with a strong tag finish. Pianist: Louise Rose.

@048 In the Garden (by C. Austin Miles, 1912) In 3/4, this tune sounds like a sentimental Irish song-a beautiful pieriod piece, full of deft chordal playing. Pianist: Louise Rose
@049 I Believe Him (Louise Rose original) This well-constructed song has a powerful contemporary Gospel feel, with lots of driving energy. Notice her use of the fast broken chord up to an octave as a strong dramatic device. The ostinato in the extended coda is a good example of the ideal way to practice hand separation and the walking bassline. Pianist: Louise Rose.
@050 Just Over in the Glory Land (by James W. Acuff & Emmet S. Dean)  A solid, marchlike assertion of faith (in heaven). Note the repeating background motive of I-IV alternating chords, which serves as a response to the melody's call. In the last chorus Rose adds extra energy to this simply by using an upward octave displacement for a brief section. In this medium tempo version Rose takes the harmonic liberty of a whole-tone chordal descent as a fill.  Pianist: Louise Rose.
@051 Leaning on the Everlasting Arms (by Elisha A. Hoffman & Anthony J. Showalter) Solid meat and potatoes Gospel in full chordal style. Moderate tempo. Pianist: Louise Rose.
@052 Leave it There (by Charles A. Tindley, 1916) A strong, assertive treatment of this Gospel favorite. Notice the effective use of walking bass in the last chorus,  which ends with an appealing tag. Pianist: Louise Rose.
@053 Pass Me Not O Gentle Savior (by Fanny J. Crosby & William H. Doane) Forceful rendition of this classic entirely in chordal style. The intensity lifts a bit following the modulation about two-thirds of the way through, but the assertiveness returns for the last chorus. Pianist: Lousie Rose.
@054 Shall We Gather by the River (Traditional) Rose brings out the deep beauty of this simple, compelling camp meeting song. Notice how much power she derives from judicious rhythmic shifts-a syncopation, a triplet-and from her modulation going into the chorus  (rather than at the top of the tune) at the end. The left hand in walking octaves sometimes with upbeats moves the piece along steadily without roiling its decorum. This is more a walk than a dance. Pianist: Louise Rose.
@055 Solid Rock (Traditional) You can hear both the baroque origins of the piece and the contemporary sensibility of the pianist in this exquisite rendition. Notice how stateliness is maintained through the use of a choral style of playing: virtually entirely chordal in the left and right hands, in contrast to the separate left hand rhythm used so effectively in other pieces.The Pianist: Louise Rose.
@056 Stand by Me (by Charles Albert Tindley) A masterful treatment of this Tindley standard. Notice the use of inner voices and the subtle effect of rolled chords. The contemporary harmonies add poignancy throughout. Unique to this piece is the strummed chorus at the end: chords and melody on every beat of the measure, which adds an urgency to the song.  Pianist: Louise Rose.
@057 Sweet By and By (Traditional) Notice how swing is first implied in the opening (chordal) statement of the melody, then made increasingly obvious as the left hand assumes a more and more independent role, taking charge of the underlying rhythm. First it adds the strong beats of the measure, with some upbeats for emphasis, then a kind of half walking bass, then a full walking bass with some bluesy single note phrases which dip into the "secular" realm-but only for a moment. A striking two-handed chordal descent brings us back to the more Gospel-sounding chordal melody, and thence to a pedal tone back beat for the coda. The last motive repeats the intro, and we end on a deceptive cadence, quickly resolved.   Pianist: Louise Rose.
@058 We Will Understand it By and By (by Charles Albert Tindley) A solid, moving Gospel song evoking camp meetings, revivals and community song fests. Rose's version typifies Gospel swing, which she manifests in its full glory by the third chorus. Notice the skillful use of triplet chords in the last chorus and the appealing intro/ending theme. Pianist: Louise Rose.
@059 Will the Circle Be Unbroken (Traditional) A soul stirring rendition of this classic with some swinging boogie sections and a modulation. Pianist: Louise Rose.
@060  Deep River (Traditional) This tune, gorgeous in its simplicity is played her in a straight melodic version in ad lib tempo with one modulation. Pianist: Joel Simpson
@061 Go Down Moses/Joshua Fit the Battle of Jericho (Traditional) These classic spirituals balance nicely with one another, the solemnity of "Go Down, Moses" with the levity of "Joshua Fit..." Here, however, Simpson leaves solemnity behind by the second chorus of "Moses," while giving "Joshua" a light hearted jazz treatment, all of it with a Gospel/blues flavor, and returning to the solemnity of the first tune in the coda. Pianist: Joel Simpson
@062  He's Got the Whole World in His Hands (Traditional) This is the kind of spiritual in which the spirit means spirited!  A rousing performance with a New Orleans trad jazz flavor.  Pianist: Joel Simpson
@063  Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Chile (Traditional) This plaintive spiritual ballad receives a four-part treatment in three keys here. In the first section, in C minor, Simpson demonstrates the closeness of the blues, especially the minor blues here, to its roots in the spiritual. He maintains a calmly persistent tempo throughout, using the walking left hand as the motor force. The C# minor sections begins with an 8-bar vamp which brings the listener to another depth. From there emerges a lovely counter-melody, played twice-in two different registers. The next modulation thrusts the listener into a contemporary setting in a satisfyingly astringent contrast to what has come before. The D minor section is marked by chromatically ascending fourth chords in the left hand and blues motives in the right. A return to C minor brings us back to the original feel, which leads into an extended coda on a two-chord vamp, with a two handed octave finale. Pianist: Joel Simpson
@

