
@001 I. A. Blues, is a minor blues composed by Renee Rosnes. The 'head' or melody has a 60's McCoy Tyner/Elvin Jones feel. Notice the bass ostinato in 5ths, the arranged rhythmic shots for bass and drums and the piano comp on the head (an integral part of the arrangement). In the solo section, observe how a simple blues lick is played with and developed. During the piano solo, the phrasing has a laid back feel. This tune was performed by Renee on her CD, "Renee Rosnes" Blue Note (EMI Toshido). Key of Cm. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of McCoy Tyner. 
 
@002 One For Walton, a Renee Rosnes composition, is a tribute to pianist Cedar Walton. Although the melody flows effortlessly, this piece presents a challenge for soloing because of the chromatic nature of the chord progression. Some of these compositional nuances (a simple melody over a difficult chord progression) are typical of writers such as Cedar. From the Billy Drummond CD, 'Native Colours', on Criss Cross. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. All of Renee's tunes are published by Second Floor Music. Key of Gb. Picture of Renee Rosnes. 

@003 The Land of Five Rivers: The title for this Renee Rosnes composition is a translation of the word Punjab, which is the Northern Province of India. Excluding the intro and ending, this is a more extended than usual 58 bar form. The harmony and many of the voicings are Wayne Shorter inspired. From the CD: 'As We Are Now', Renee Rosnes, 1997. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of Herbie Hancock.    

@004 As We Are Now, by Renee Rosnes, is a sensitive, moody ballad, written in 1997. It has the sound and feel of a standard. The performance here suggests the spirit of groups like the Keith Jarrett trio (with Jack DeJohnette and Gary Peacock), who enjoy playing standards in a modern and innovative way. This piece has a 22 bars form, with a long vamp at the end. From the CD: 'As We Are Now', Renee Rosnes, 1997, (EMI). Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of  Keith Jarrett.   

@005 One World, was written by New York pianist, Renee Rosnes. The feel, which might be the inspiration for the title, combines Asian sounding fourths and pentatonics with a straight 8th's Latin-Samba feel. From the CD: 'One World', Native Colours, on Concord. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. picture of Kevin Hays.    

@006 Lifewish, a Renee Rosnes composition, is a simple melody played over a not so simple chord progression in the spirit and rhythmic feel of tunes such as Herbie Hancock's 'Dolphin Dance'. Notice the use of polychords and the interesting rhythm of the melody. From the CD, Ancestors', Renee Rosnes. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of Herbie Hancock. 

@007 Girlie's World, is a delightful jazz waltz by Renee Rosnes (named for her cat, Girlie). This 40 bar tune displays a type of modal harmony which is also found in the writing of players like Cedar Walton. From the CD, 'One World',  Native Colours. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of Renee Rosnes. 

@008 The Storyteller, by Renee Rosnes, is a composition which alternates between 3/4 and 4/4 time.  It begins with a 14 bar intro which has an Afro 3/4 rhythmic feel and whole tone harmony (as exemplified by such tunes as Wayne Shorter's 'Ju Ju'). Blowing goes from 3/4 to four bars of 4/4. From the CD, 'Renee Rosnes', Renee Rosnes. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of McCoy Tyner. 

@009 The Gift, is a sensitive and harmonically complex Jazz Waltz by Renee Rosnes. As she says, 'it was inspired by my treasured friendship with Herbie Hancock'. It is performed here with a very loose 3/4 feel. As is typical with Renee's tunes, there are a lot of interesting chordal progressions which are challenging to blow on.  From the CD, 'Ancestors', Renee Rosnes. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of Herbie Hancock. 

@010 Mizmahta, is a composition by Renee Rosnes. The title refers to the nickname for Martha Baratz, one of Renee's managers. This 17 bar tune has a little Chick Corea vibe to it. Notice how the arrangement of the 'head' or melody, features bass, drums and piano shots at certain key focal points. From the CD 'As We Are Now' Renee Rosnes, EMI 1997. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of Chick Corea.    

@011 Abstraction Blue (For Georgia O'Keeffe), was written by Renee Rosnes as a commission from Jazz at Lincoln Center. The first section is played in solo rubato style with an ascending passage which begins in the lower register. The initial theme is continued in an abstract and rubato fashion. The bass joins the piano in tempo at bar 104. From the CD 'As We Are Now' Renee Rosnes, EMI 1997. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of Renee Rosnes.   

@012 For the Moment, by Renee Rosnes is a 3/4 composition with phrasing in 3 bar groups which makes it slightly unusual. The bass ostinato and the melody overlap each other in an imitation format. This performance has an open, loose and harmonically free feel. From the CD, 'For The Moment', Renee Rosnes. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of Fred Hersch. 

@013 Orion's Belt, is a medium swing composition by Renee Rosnes, performed here in a trio context. This 28 bar tune begins with a Dmaj7 alternating with a Dm9 chord. This performance suggests a Chick Corea trio-type feel. From the CD, 'One World', Native Colours, on Concord. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. Picture of Chick Corea. 


@014 Native Colours is performed as a piano solo by the composer, Renee Rosnes in a straight 8ths, bossa-feel. This pretty tune builds on the initial rhythmic motif and harmonically moves around quite a bit. Note the use of polychords such as: D/Bb, E/G7 etc.  From the CD, 'Native Colours', Billy Drummond, on Criss Cross. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of Renee Rosnes. 


@015 Lexicon, a modal F blues, was written by Renee Rosnes. This piece, which is performed here as a duet with the bass, is a challenge for anyone interested in 'time things'. To play the piano part takes dexterity and independence in both right and left hands. Although the time for this piece was originally written with alternating bars of 5/8, 7/8, 4/4 etc., it is notated here in 4/4 throughout for simplicity. The blowing section has a McCoy Tyner feel. From the CD, 'Native Colours', Billy Drummond, on Criss Cross. Performed by: Renee Rosnes. All of Renee's tunes are published by Second Floor Music.  Picture of Renee Rosnes. 
 

@016 A Little Naive, by Brad Turner, is a tender Jazz Waltz with a Gb tonal center (although polytonal throughout). The harmony is complex and dissonant with many polychords and yet the melody is kept simple and unclouded by the harmony. Notice that although this is a piano solo there is a lot of room left for the chords to breath and the sonorities to develop. Pianist, singer Shirley Horn is an exponent of this. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Richie Beirach. 

@017 One Look, was composed by Brad Turner. The style of the tune and the performance here displays a definite a Keith Jarrett influence. Notice in the un-busy playing, the chord clusters are allowed to ring. The tune begins with a bar of four major 7 chords (D, G, E, C) modulating to a B13sus. The key signature is A but the tune is definitely polytonal. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Keith Jarrett. 

@018 The Low Road, by Brad Turner, begins with an 8 bar introduction where the piano and bass set up a nice walking groove. The tune has a minor mode feel to it. The piano style here emulates players like Kenny Barron. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Kenny Barron. 

@019 Gotham, was written by Brad Turner and centers around a Doreen Cm. This performance displays a McCoy Tyner influence - fifths in the left hand, quartal harmony and fourth intervals in the lines. Compositionally, Brad, who is also an excellent trumpet player and drummer, says he also feels quite influenced by drummer Victor Lewis' melodies. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of John Hicks. 

@020 Out of the Valley, by Brad Turner, is a slow-swing Gospel Waltz. The melody and sensitive playing evokes a warm feeling and a sense of nostalgia, reminiscent of some of Keith Jarrett's performances. Key of Db. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Keith Jarrett. 

@021 Little P.A., by Brad Turner is performed here as a straight 8ths piano and bass duet. This tune uses cyclical harmony with 2-5 progressions which have deceptive cadences; for example: F#m7b5, B7alt, to Cmaj7. The harmony never really touches down anywhere until the very end. Compositionally, this piece exemplifies Herbie Hancock's writing.  Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Herbie Hancock.  

@022 There and Back, by Brad Turner is played here as a medium-fast Samba in a trio setting. Performed in a Chick Corea trio style, this tune features clusters and 'crunches' here and there with Latin Montuno playing. A 'crunch' refers to a voicing which contains a half step interval in the middle. For example: an A7alt crunch voicing from the bottom would be: G, C, C# and F. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Jacky Terrason. 

@023 Roxy, by Brad Turner is a Gm blues with altered harmony. This trio arrangement features lots of ensemble shots. The blowing choruses alternate between regular minor blues changes for a chorus and the altered changes for a chorus. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Brad Turner. 

@024 Caller #9, by Brad Turner, is an up-tempo swing trio performance. Centered around Bb alternating between Dorian and Mixolydian sounds. Notice the vamp section on G7sus at the end of the blowing section. Because of the funky vamp section at the end of each chorus, this performance has a playfulness to it which is reminiscent of Herbie Hancock's style. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Brad Turner. 

@025 Bohemia, is a composition by Brad Turner which has a distinct classical flavor. It is performed here as a piano duo with bass in a slow straight 8ths tempo. The opening two bars have a fugue-like feeling between the two instruments and there is also written counterpoint in the statement of the melody. This tune alternates between 4/4, 2/4 meters with occasional 5/4 and 6/4 bars. Players like Fred Hersch, Chick Corea and Keith Jarrett like to import classical music devices to their Jazz compositions. The blowing section features Sus9 chords and Lydian sounds. Performed by: Brad Turner. Picture of Fred Hersch. 

@026 Devonitely, by Ron Johnston, is a trio performance in a medium swing tempo. The 'A' section is 6 bars long and features a bar each of chromatically descending chords starting with Fmaj7 and ending with C7#5. This kind of progression is found in tunes like 'Early Autumn' and 'Rosetta'. The bridge features big-band-like shots. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Key of F. Picture of Ron Johnston. 

@027 Sixth Sense, is a C minor blues by Ron Johnston presented here in trio format. The first 2 choruses have a big-band shout chorus feel, after which, at bar 25,  the melody is stated. Notice the Minor-major 7ths and minor 6th intervals in the be-bop sounding 'head' and also (at bar 29) the bar of 5 over 4, followed by a bar of 6 over 4. This tune was featured on the Ian McDougall CD, 'The Warmth of the Horn' (Concord) and also by Rob McConnell and the Boss Brass on the CD 'Even Canadians Get the Blues'. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Key of Cm. Picture of James Williams. 

@028 Devon's Delight, written by Ron Johnston for his son, is a medium-up swing trio rendition in the key of C. In the initial chord progression, Cmaj7, Gb7b5, Fmaj7, the Gb7b5 is the tri-tone substitution for C7. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Picture of Ron Johnston. 

@029 Pastels, by Ron Johnston, is a Jazz Waltz performed in a duo setting with piano and bass. The 16 bar intro with pedal 5 in the bass, sets up the main theme at 17 which has an initial chord progression not unlike such tunes as 'Daydream', Misty' and 'Wave'. The playing style is reminiscent of players like Lynne Arriale, Bill Evans and Fred Hersch. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Picture of Bill Evans. 

@030 Dublin, was written by Ron Johnston. The flowing changes in this medium swing trio rendition take the listener through several key centers; G, Eb, Ab, E and A. The first ending has a feeling of modulating to a new key, rather than returning to the top. This tune and the performance have a very uplifting spirit. Notice the George Shearing harmonized solo lines beginning at bar 97. Other composers using similar chordal movements are Johnny Mandel and Fred Hersch. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Picture of Brad Mehldau.  

@031 Filomena, which is the Portuguese for 'Love of my Life' was written by Ron Johnston. This medium-up swing trio performance begins with a 4 bar intro. The be-bop melody is based on a chord progression, elements of which are found in tunes like 'Slow Boat To China', 'Have You Met Miss Jones' and 'It Could Happen To You'. Performed by: Ron Johnston.  Picture of Ron Johnston. 

@032 Gift of Love, is a very pretty love song which was originally written by Ron Johnston for the movie, 'The Escape'(1997). This straight 8ths ballad begins with the 2-minor descending cliche over the pedal 5. The chordal movement at bar 9 is typically utilized by players like Joe Zawinul and Keith Jarrett. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Picture of Keith Jarrett. 

@033 Mididad, a Ron Johnston composition, is performed here as medium up swing piano solo. The 'two-fisted' piano playing shows some of the elements of counterpoint found in the playing of pioneers like Lennie Tristano. The 'A' section is an unusually short 5 bars long - a form which is found also in tunes like 'Gloria's Step'. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Picture of Jim NcNeely. 

@034 Come To Me, by Ron Johnston, is a medium swing trio rendition which displays some of the pianistic elements of players like Brad Mehldau and Jim McNeely. The chord progression is not unlike those found in tunes like 'Yesterdays', 'Summer Night' and 'Alone Together'. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Picture of Steve Kuhn. 

@035 Robin, is a minor-modal piece by Ron Johnston. This medium tempo, straight 8ths performance demonstrates a trio style found in groups headed by Cedar Walton, Kenny Barron and George Cables. The 'B' section makes use of Maj7#5 chords. The scale used here these chords is 1, b3, 3, #5, and 7. Key of Dm. Performed by: Ron Johnston. Picture of Kenny Barron. 

@036 X-Ray, was written in '94 by Miles Black. It is a bright Jazz Waltz performed in a trio setting. The harmony is polytonal and the playing is in the style of Chick Corea (check out bar 193 - 200). Notice how polychords such as A/F and A13/G are soloed on. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Chick Corea.  

@037 Snakes & Ladders, by Miles Black, is presented in a medium-up Latin trio rendition. The 'head' is arranged for trio, with ensemble shots. The drumming is sparse throughout. Notice the Chick Corea influenced rhythmic things at bar 69. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Miles Black. 

@038 Lookout, by Miles Black, is a fast swing trio piece which begins with a 16 bar intro, featuring voicings in 4ths. This performance is influenced by the playing of McCoy Tyner and Chick Corea. Notice the advanced rhythmic shots at bars 65 to 75. The blowing (soloing) is 16 bars of Bm7, 8bars of Fmaj7 and 8 bars of Am7. Notice the completeness of the piano trio arrangement with written shots and piano and bass fills. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of McCoy Tyner. 

@039 Summerset, by Miles Black, is a medium-swing Jazz Waltz, played in trio format. The tune begins with solo rubato piano. The bass and drums join in when the playing goes to tempo at bar 53. Notice the harp-like effect at bar 16, the interactive bass and drums, the use of polychords and the influence of players like Richie Beirach. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Richie Beirach. 

@040 Something Like, was written in '92 by Miles Black. It is a bright 4/4 modern swing in trio setting. The playing is influenced by pianists like Mulgrew Miller and Kenny Kirkland. Notice the use of 4ths and Lydian modes. At bar 28, tension is released with a series of descending 2-5's. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Jacky Terrason.  

@041 Pale Moon, by Miles Black, is a trio, straight 8ths ballad. The 16 bar intro creates quiet tension. At bar 23 there is a very beautiful and melodic cadence which becomes a focal point. This performance is influenced by Keith Jarrett's straight 8ths ballad playing. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Miles Black. 

@042 Flying Duck, by Miles Black, is a very fast, 16 bar, 4/4 swing trio tune. Notice the passages of solo piano octaves followed by trio shots. This piece has elements of McCoy Tyner and Hal Galper's playing. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of McCoy Tyner. 

@043 Song for PJ, was written by Miles Black and named for Alto player P.J. Perry. Pianistic ideas and influences of Bill Evans, Herbie Hancock and Fred Hersch are found in this swing trio performance. Altered dominant chords (in which the 5th and the 9th are flatted or sharped) appear frequently in this piece. Notice the deceptive cadence in the first progression;  A7alt, D7alt, Ebmaj7. A D7 would more often cadence to some kind of G or Db chord. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Fred Hersch.  

@044 Pieces of Sky, by Miles Black, is a modern medium tempo Jazz Waltz, played in piano/bass duo format. This piece combines a pretty (but slightly 'outside') melody with lush harmonies. Although it begins with a typical 1,6,2,5 progression, it soon moves to a more polytonal (many key centers) harmony. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Jacky Terrason.  

@045 Moderno Blues, composed in 1997 by Miles Black, is a medium swing, Bb blues, piano and bass duet. The changes are slightly altered from the normal blues changes - e.g. the 12th bar is Gb7 rather than F7. This performance is in the style of Cedar Walton and Kenny Barron. Notice the counterpoint between the bass and piano (e.g. bar 4). Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Thelonius Monk.  

@046 Autumn Nocturnal, is a solo ballad performance, composed by Miles Black in 1988. This is a melodic, moody and ethereal piece which demonstrates pianistic influences of Herbie Hancock, Bill Evans and Andy Laverne. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Bill Evans.  

@047 Be the One. Written by Miles Black, this Samba is a solo piano performance. Note the use of syncopation in the left hand and the inner right hand voicings. The playing here is not unlike the style of Gonzalvo Rubalcaba. The 8 bar intro is also used as an ending. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Kevin Hays. 

@048 Understanding Standing Under, is a 1992 composition by Miles Black. This moody ballad is played as a solo piano performance in tempo. Notice that the rhythmic motif established in bar 1 is continued and developed throughout. The playing exemplifies the solo pianistic styles of Herbie Hancock and Fred Hersch. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Herbie Hancock. 

@049 Moon Walk, by Miles Black, is a solo medium-swing rendition featuring a Dave McKenna-like left hand walking bass. The chord progression here is similar to older standards like 'Gone With the Wind', 'Jeepers Creepers' and 'Love is Just Around the Corner'. However, notice the quite 'outside' melody and the performance, which is not unlike Michael Petrucianni's style. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Dick Hyman.  

@050 Tomorrow's Tune, by Miles Black, is a very fast (qn=266) polytonal Jazz Waltz played in a solo piano rendition. The piece is played rubato, ending with a Spanish sounding Phrygian mode flourish. Tempo begins at bar 41. Note the use of polychords and the Richie Beirach influence. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Richie Beirach.
