@001 Latin Pianist- Overview \ Welcome to The Latin Pianist. With this program you can enjoy, explore and learn about the diversified and stylistic world of Latin music. The music in The Latin Pianist encompasses most of the Afro-Cuban (referred to as Salsa) and Brazilian musical styles.  

All the pieces were composed and performed by world-renowned Salsa and Latin artist Rebeca Mauleón-Santana.  Rebeca has performed and recorded with most of the greats in the Latin musical world, including Tito Puente, Carlos Santana and Israel "Cachao" Lopez. As the author of the acclaimed 'Salsa Guidebook for Piano and Ensemble', published by Sher Music and also co-editor of 'The Latin Real Book', also published by Sher Music (and both highly recommended), Rebeca is certainly an expert in this field. Aside from her pianistic, arranging and compositional skills, Rebeca is also a highly regarded specialist and teacher of Afro-Cuban music. 

The Latin Pianist features 50 MIDI performances which cover the entire gamut of  Latin music. About thirty specific styles with memos written by the composer are included. The instrumentation ranges from solo piano through full ensemble. Because Latin music is so stylized, we have made it easy to select tunes by style. Simply press the 'Styles' button to categorize the tunes into four general groups, or the 'Specific' button to group the tunes in more detailed fashion. The files and can be viewed on screen,  studied and individual tracks printed out. Chord symbols are of course included. The many varied Latin piano comping  styles are all addressed. Drummers and bass players will appreciate the specific Latin patterns. There are many open Montuno sections and as usual, lots of soloing. 

If you'd like to take a less selective approach, simply press the 'Play All' button and sit back and enjoy 3 hours of music. As you are listening, you might want to browse through Biographies of notable Latin artists. Or you could test your knowledge by playing the Trivia game. For an explanation of terms found in the memos, be sure to check out the Latin glossary by pressing the 'Dict.' Button.. This is excerpted from 'The Salsa Guidebook for Piano and Ensemble'.  


@002 Composer's notes\ As with all styles of music, it is always recommended that the musician seek out more information in order to become familiar with the intricacies of playing and composing within that style.  Afro-Cuban music is rich in tradition and variation, and further study is highly recommended.  It is also important to note that "Salsa" is not a rhythm, but rather a general term which may be used to include a wide variety of rhythmic styles.  Also, within the category of "dance music," "salsa" tends to be vocal music, whereas the term "Latin-Jazz" may be better used to described instrumental music.  These are generalizations, of course, but may give you a better idea of how these tunes might be presented in their typical settings.  

Brazilian music, like Afro-Cuban, is rich in rhythmic variation, and tends to explore more contemporary jazz harmony and voicings. Although these examples are presented in both clave directions, Brazilian rhythms are usually not as "strict" when it comes to the effects of the clave on the ensemble. However, there are some similarities to Cuban montuno-playing, in that 2-3 clave direction montunos tend to start on the downbeat, and 3-2 patterns tend to start on the upbeat. Brazilian patterns for piano also often feature a constant, up-beat ostinato, which can be maintained in the left hand while soloing-a good exercise for coordination!).

Have fun!
Rebeca Mauleón-Santana

@003 Mauleon, Rebeca \ Rebeca Mauleón has specialized in Afro-Caribbean music for over twenty years as a pianist, composer, arranger, author and educator.   Firmly rooted in the Afro-Cuban tradition, Mauleón has recorded and performed with several luminaries in the Latin music scene, including Tito Puente, Carlos Santana, Israel "Cachao" López, Steve Turré, Carlos "Patato" Valdez, Francisco Aguabella, José Luis Quintana "Changuito," Giovanni Hidalgo, Joe Henderson, Armando Peraza, Walfredo de los Reyes, Orestes Vilató and the Machete Ensemble (of which she was co-musical director for nearly ten years).  Her piano and vocal work are featured on several Grammy Award winning and nominated albums, including Tito Puente's Goza Mi Timbal (1990 Grammy Award Winner), and the 1995 Grammy Nominee Ritmo y Candela, with Patato, Changuito and Orestes Vilató.  As an educator, Rebeca is much in demand as a teacher and clinician throughout the US and Europe, conducting classes and lectures for the Stanford Jazz Workshop, Jazz Camp West, Mills College, Monterey Jazz Festival, Banff Center for the Arts (Canada), Sibelius Academy & Pop and Jazz Conservatory (Finland) and others. She is the author of the critically acclaimed "Bible" of Salsa music, the Salsa Guidebook for Piano and Ensemble ((c) Sher Music, 1993), which has been incorporated as an official text by such renown institutions as the Berklee College of Music in Boston, and is co-editor of the Latin Real Book ((c) Sher Music, 1997). She holds an MA in Composition from Mills College, (1997) and has published several articles for top music magazines, including Keyboard Magazine, Modern Drummer and Bass Player.  Mauleón has been commissioned as a composer and arranger by an array of leading artists and companies, among them Tito Puente, Steve Winwood, Ray Obiedo, The Oakland Youth Chorus, the San Francisco Jazz Festival and the Berkeley Repertory Theatre.  She is also featured as a performer and interviewer on an instructional video for DCI/Warner with legendary Cuban percussionist José Luis Quintana "Changuito," for which she also scripted and composed.  She is now in production of a new book/cd package and instructional video for release in 1998.  With her debut solo cd Round Trip, Mauleón launches a powerhouse nine-piece ensemble along with many renown Bay Area performers, as well as a new independent recording and production company: Rumbeca Music.  For more information, check out Rebeca's web site: www.rumbeca.com  .    Selected Discography: Rebeca Mauleón, Round Trip, Rumbeca Music CD-001, 1997; Steve Winwood, Junction Seven, Virgin Records 1997; Patato, Changuito, Orestes, Ritmo y Candela, Redwood 9503, 1995;  The Machete Ensemble, Machete, Xenophile 4029, 1995; Tito Puente, Royal 'T', Concord Picante CCD-4553, 1993; Ray Obiedo, Sticks & Stones, Windham Hill Jazz 10142-2, 1993; Carlos Santana, Milagro, Polydor 314-513 197-2, 1992; Tito Puente, Goza Mi Timbal, Picante CCD-4399, 1990;  Ray Obiedo, Iguana, Windham Hill Jazz WD-0128, 1990; Ray Obiedo, Perfect Crime, Windham Hill Jazz WD-0115, 1989; Tito Puente Latin Ensemble, Salsa Meets Jazz, Picante CJP-354, 1988; Pete Escovedo, Mister E, Crossover CR-5005, 1988;  The Machete Ensemble, Africa Volume 1, Earthbeat, 1993 (re-issue); Tit Puente Latin Ensemble, UN Pooch Loco, Piquant CJP-329, 1987.
@004 Camilo, Michel \ Michel Camilo was born in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic on April 4, 1954. Camilo's formal music training began at the age of 5 when he entered the National Conservatory. He graduated some 13 years later with a 'Professorship in Music' and then joined the Dominican Republic's National Symphony Orchestra where he played piano and percussion. In 1979, Camilo moved to New York to continue his music education at Mannes College and the Juilliard School of Music. His playing gained prominence first with the band French Toast, and then later performing and recording with Paquito D'Rivera. In 1983, the Manhattan Transfer recorded a version of Camilo's tune 'Why Not!,' which won a Grammy Award. Shortly thereafter, he released two albums of his own: Why Not! and Suntan/Michel Camilo trio. Camilo returned to the National Symphony Orchestra of the Dominican Republic in 1987, this time to conduct a program of classical music featuring Korsakoff, Beethoven, Dvorak, and his own work "The Goodwill Games Theme" for which he was awarded an Emmy. That year he also became the musical director of the Heineken Jazz Festival in his native Dominican Republic and has continued with the festival sharing the stage with jazz luminaries like Dizzy Gillespie, Toots Thielemans, Jon Faddis, Eddie Daniels, Tania Maria, Stanley Turrentine, Paquito D'Rivera, Bobby Watson, Newport Jazz All-Stars, Flora Purim, Airto Moreira, Benny Green, and Dave Valentin among others. 

@005 Gismonti, Egberto \  Egberto Gismonti was born in 1947 in Carmo, Brazil. He began his musical studies at the age of six, studying the piano for some 15 years before he went to France to study composition with Nadia Boulanger and Jean Barlaque. Gismonti was deeply affected by his time in France, and by the time he returned to Brazil, he was ready to move beyond the confines of classical music. Over the next few years, he devoted his time to exploring the possibilites of alternate tunings and to searching for new sounds and timbres with flutes, kalimbas, voice, and percussion. Gismonti began recording with ECM records and released albums with Nana Vasconcelos, Jan Garbarek, and Collin Walcott, and in 1979 he released the album Solo, which featured him playing B-string guitar, piano, and bells. During the 1980s, Gismonti toured Europe and recorded music that began to focus increasingly on traditional Amazon Indian music, and in 1990 he toured the United States with Jacques Morelenbaum, Nivaldo Ornellas and Eda Mello E Souza. Some recordings include: Duas Vozes, oDanas Das Cabeas, Sanfona, Magico, Sol Do Meio Dia.


@006 Hernandez, Oscar \ Considered by many to be among the most gifted and prominent pianists and arrangers in Latin music, Oscar Hernandez holds a Bachelor of Arts from City University of New York, and he has been the musical force behind such contemporary musicians as Ruben Blades and, more recently, Paul Simon. Born and raised in the Bronx, Hernandez has worked as a pianist, arranger, and producer, having performed and recorded with such artists as Tito Puente, Celia Cruz, Julio Iglesias, Juan Luis Guerra, and many others.
 
@007 Jobim, Antonio Carlos \  Antonio Carlos Brasileiro de Almeida  Jobim (also known as Tom) was born in the Tijuca section of Rio, Brazil on January 25, 1927. Jobim originally began studying for a career in architecture but was enchanted by the spell of music, and by the age of 20 he was performing live and working recording sessions on a regular basis. His first recording was with singer Bill Farr, and in 1954 he worked with poet Vinicius de Moraes on the score for the Orfeo do Carnaval, which was later made into the famous film Black Orpheus. In 1962, Stan Getz and Charlie Byrd recorded some of Jobim's tunes, "Desafinado", "Girl from Ipenema" and "Corcovado" which became huge hits. The Bossa Nova craze swept North America and the rest of the world and as a result,  he and many other Brazilian musicians were invited to perform at a Carnegie Hall showcase. During the 1960s and 1970s, Jobim recorded extensively for several record labels, and often worked with arranger and conductor Claus Ogerman, including scores for Brazilian television and film. In the wake of the growing popularity of rock music, Brazilian music went out of fashion in the USA and in response Jobim began to withdraw from the popular music scene. His performance career experienced a revival in the early 1980s, and by 1985, as world music and a second Brazilian wave gathered steam, Jobim started touring again with a group containing his second wife Ana Lontra, his son Paulo, daughter Elizabeth and various musician friends. Jobim's songs are plaintive, and yet graceful and sensuous, which gave jazz musicians of the sixties a subtle musical alternative in their repertoire.  Jobim began receiving the world-wide recognition that he so richly deserved in the 1990s, securing his reputation as one of the most important songwriters of the era before his sudden death of heart failure in 1994. Some of Jobim's other really well known tunes are: Wave, Triste, How Insensitive,  Look to the Sky, So Danca Samba, Gentle is the Rain.
@008 Maria, Tania \ Tania Maria was born in Sao Luis, Brazil on May 9, 1948. A vibrant and energetic performer, Maria began studying music as a classical pianist at an early age, and then later shifted her focus to samba music in her teens. She moved to Paris to play with her trio in Europe, spending some eight years there before relocating to the United States. Maria's popularity in the United States skyrocketed when she began recording for the Concord label in the 1980s, and she was awarded a Grammy for Best Female Jazz Vocalist in 1985. She has a distinctive style that combines the essence of samba with intellectual jazz. Her piano playing emphasizes a percussive left hand, and her voice has risen to a near instrumental form of scat vocalizing. Some well known tunes by Tania are: 'Yatra -Ta' and 'Come With Me'.


@009 Palmieri, Eddie \ Latin jazz and salsa ambassador Eddie Palmieri is an exceptional pianist whose broad range of styles and influences range from the sophistication of McCoy Tyner to the provocative innovations of Herbie Hancock. His use of complex rhythms, disparate phrases, and percussive technique have made him a unique and driving force in the world of Latin jazz. His solos are invigorating and fresh, and he freely draws inspiration from bebop, Latin, fusion, and straight-ahead jazz. Palmieri began his musical career with a neighborhood band in Orlando Marin, and then later made his professional debut in 1955 with Johnny Sequi's orchestra. Although he originally began as a singer, his brother Charlie convinced him to focus more on his piano playing. After leaving Johnny Sequi's orchestra, he played with Vincentico Valdes, Pete Terrace, and Tito Rodriguez, and in 1962 he formed the band Conjunto La Perfecta, which included Barry Rogers, Johnny Pacheco, Manny Oquendo, and George Castro. Conjunto La Perfecta recorded several albums throughout the sixties but ultimately disbanded in 1968 because of financial difficulties. Palmieri moved on, first recording and playing with The Tico All-Stars and The Fania All-Stars, and then later with Alfredo Armenteros,  Isreal "Cachao" Lopez, and Justo Betancourt. In the early 1970s, he worked with the funk band Harlem River Drive after recording several Latin and R&B sessions. From the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s, Palmieri's recordings were an eclectic mix of contemporary Latin, pop, rock, and jazz, and virtually every album he released during this period was nominated for a Grammy Award. His superb playing and compositional skills have earned Palmieri the respect and admiration of fans and critics alike.


@010 Prado, Perez \Dámaso Pérez Prado was born in Matanzas, Cuba on December 11, 1916. His parents were both professionals; his mother was a local schoolteacher, and his father was a journalist. Prado began his studies when he was very young with the music of the classical masters, and he later played organ and piano in theatres and nightclubs as a teenager. His concept of the mambo began to develop in 1943 while he served as pianist and arranger for the renowned Orquesta Casino de la Playa in Havana. While there, he began to acquire a love for the mambo, and he later recalled that he and a number of other musicians would often gather after-hours and experiment with cross-rhythms and syncopations. These impromptu sessions were reputed to be the impetus for the mambo, and he subsequently earned the title 'El Rey del Mambo' (The King of the Mambo).

@011 Puente, Tito \  Born in New York in 1920, Tito Puente's first professional gig was with Noro Morales' orchestra as a drummer.  After leaving Morales' band, Puente played for a short while with Machito before he was drafted into the US Navy, where he played with legendary band leader Charlie Barnet. After leaving the military, he went to New York and studied at Juilliard School of Music while he honed his skills playing with numerous Latin bands at night. He formed the band Tito Puente and his Orchestra and recorded on Tico Records for the duration of the Cha-cha wave that was sweeping the US at the time. He alternated between record labels and Latin styles that waxed and waned throughout the sixties, and then in the early seventies he and his band set the stage for the rise of Salsa. A prolific and tireless musician, Puente's accumulated works include more than a hundred records and countless arrangements. He is the recipient of several honorary doctorates for his contributions to Latin music and jazz, and through the Tito Puente Scholarship fund, he has helped many young musicians realize their musical dreams and aspirations. Some well known tunes by Tito are: 'Dejame Sonar', 'Sin Tu Carino', 'Ran Can Can' and 'Picadillo'.  
@012 Regina, Elis \ Elis Regina was born in Porto Alegre, in Southern Brazil. She began singing on radio shows when she was only 14, and she recorded her first album at the age of 16. Regina's spirited and passionate style, and her innate drive earned her the title Queen of the Disco Club in 1961 and a Best Singer of the Year award in 1962.  Not one to be confined by the limited opportunities in her home town, Regina moved to Rio de Janeiro to sing in the night-clubs, where she falsified her age to club owners and hid in the bathrooms during police raids. Her popularity was seemingly boundless. By the age of 20 she was delivering her brilliant, singular interpretations of bossa nova songs to audiences in Sao Paulo.  Regina's brazen and irreverent personality often put her at odds with composers and the public. She sometimes changed the lyrics of songs by composers such as Gilberto Gil and Caetano, much to their displeasure and she was forthright in performing works by lesser known composers, which were sometimes politically charged and controversial. But her obstinacy was vital to composers such as Chico Buarque, Milton Nascimento, and Aldir Blanc, who would have otherwise remained unheard and neglected. Tragically, Regina's life was cut short in January of 1982 from an accidental overdose of cocaine and alcohol. 

@013 Valdez, Chuco \ One of the greatest living jazz musicians still residing in Cuba, Chuco Valdez began playing piano when he was only three years old, and by his mid-teens he was performing with his own groups in the local Cuban jazz scene. In 1960 his father, famous musician Bebo Valdez, defected from Cuba, but Valdez remained to pursue his music career in his home country. Valdez  formed the legendary Orquesta Cubana de Musica Moderna in 1967, and in 1973 he founded the Cuban jazz orchestra Irakere, which included members Arturo Sandoval and Paquito D'Rivera. 



@
