
@001 West Coast Cha-cha, is a Latin-jazz style cha-cha with contemporary harmony. Towards the end of the piece the style transforms to a more traditional Cuban Guajira feel. The song begins with a syncopated vamp supporting the flute melody, followed by a light drum backbeat feel for the bridge and then a return to the "A" section. The final guajira section begins with a typical arpeggiated montuno (repeated vamp section) on the piano. The piece ends with a brief danzón section. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Am. Picture of Alfredo Rodriguez.

@002 Merengation, begins with an 4 bar intro. This is an exciting, medium-tempo Merengue where the bass drum creates a downbeat '4' feel. There are several breakdown sections (for example at bar 33) where instruments are added in layers. More syncopated percussion and bass lines as well as vamp-like brass lines are featured during the breakdown. For a description of 'Merengue' and other Latin/Salsa musical terms please refer to the dictionary (press the 'Dict.' Button.) This glossary is excerpted from 'The Salsa Guidebook for Piano and Ensemble' by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana, published by Sher Music.  Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).

@003 Montuneando, is a  50's style son-montuno. A montuno is an open vamp section. This tune opens with layered sax and rhythm section lines in a typical I-IV-V-IV progression. It evolves  into a more contemporary, songo-influenced feel, with increased syncopation in the bass and piano vamps.  Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Chucho Valdez.

@004 Three 2 Samba, is a  samba in which the clave direction is 3-2 rather than 2-3. The clave is the 5 note rhythmic pattern found in all Salsa and Brazilian music. For a more detailed description press the 'Dict.' Button. Notice the  common accents and hits played by the rhythm section. The alternation between minor and relative major key areas is also seen here, with the focus of the tune in D minor, but moving through F Major in the melody. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Egberto Gismonte.

@005 Funky Son-Cha. This tune features a dominant 13th-based son-montuno in cha-cha tempo over a funky backbeat. This tune adds instruments in layers, beginning with the bass, then the drums, adding an exciting fill, and then piano. The vibes take the place of the more typical layered horn lines, and there is a syncopated bassline with an uncharacteristic emphasis on beat 3+. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of F. Picture of Papi Oviedo.

@006 Café Olé,  is a Latin-jazz mambo over "Rhythm changes," featuring a traditional Salsa rhythm section (no traps), and a dominant 7th solo section. The opening bassline establishes the harmony. The vibes then enter with the melody over a standard mambo feel in the rhythm section.  Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of C. Picture of Charlie Palmieri.

@007 Mambo Mulato. This is a D minor blues in a piano quartet setting (piano, bass, drums and percussion). The opening line - played in opposing registers on the piano - introduces the straightforward rhythm section accompaniment for the piano melody. The percussion has several small fills and breaks which add more flavor to the various sections. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Tito Puente.

@008  Samba Rose,  is a moderate tempo samba in 2-3 clave direction, featuring the melody played on vibes and several variations of syncopated piano patterns and II-V progressions. Following the head there is an electric piano solo. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of F. Picture of Egberto Gismonte.

@009 Baila Rumberita - A Latin-jazz tune with a guaguancó introduction in 3-2 clave, and a guaracha montuno section in 2-3 clave.  For more details on 'clave' please see Rebeca's glossary of terms by pressing the 'Dict.' Button. During the guaguancó section, the bassline moves with the three-side (or three-note portion) of the clave, contrasting with the conga drum pattern. The melody is played by the vibes, giving the piece a more Latin-jazz flavor. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Eddie Palmieri.

@010  Linda Flor, is Portuguese for pretty flower. This piece features the  2-3 partido alto rhythm, which is exemplified by the drums and percussion intro.  Partido alto is a popular and flavorful Brazilian rhythm style, featuring the bass and drums often playing a similar pattern (as heard here). This piece centers on two dominant (or Mixolydian) key areas, A7 and G7, with a bluesy feeling in the melody line. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of  D. Picture of Clave in 2-3 direction.

@011 El Panameño. This is an ensemble rendition of a danzón, presented in a traditional charanga instrumentation. Notice the ostinato bass, the string lines and the melody which is typically played by the flute. The piano doubles much of the melody and ensemble parts. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Machito Orchestra.

@012 Songomania - A contemporary, danceable songo style with lots of percussion fills and breaks, and several syncopated piano and bass lines. The new trend in contemporary salsa and Latin-jazz playing consists quite often of multiple breakdown sections during the course of a tune, which sets up solos, additional refrains (in vocal music), or rhythmic contrast. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of C. Picture of Carnival.

@013  Partidido Felicidad. As with many Afro-Caribbean styles, the Brazilian partido alto is also commonly played in 3-2 clave direction as it is here. This is a slightly slower tempo piece than Linda Flor, which is a 2-3 partido alto and it features more harmonic movement. The introduction of the suspended dominant 13th chords sets up the relaxed melody, played by the vibes. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Clave in 3-2 direction.

@014 Trio Uno - A classic style bolero in jazz trio setting.  Again, like many styles in "salsa" most boleros are meant to interpret vocal music.  While the piano and basslines are not as specific to the bolero as they are in other styles, the key in this rhythm is the pattern played by the conga drums-absent in a jazz trio setting. The most obvious factor is the tempo-slow and lyrical. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Em. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).

@015 Mozam B. K.  -  A bluesy mozambique-songo (see 'Dict.') with loads of dominant 13th variations. As with many Latin performances, the drums and percussion set up the rhythmic flavor in the introduction. The breakdown and solo sections feature a Brazilian-style left-hand, up-beat ostinato for the piano. The mozambique rhythm is a style of Cuban carnival music, again largely defined by percussion patterns. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of C. Picture of Tito Puente.

@016 Bombástico - A typical Puerto Rican bomba rhythm featuring accordion and piano over a standard rhythmic base and harmonic progression, including the most common percussion break in the bomba style. After the opening percussion vamp, the melody is introduced by the accordion. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Cm. Picture of Carnival.

@017 Plenera - A traditional Puerto Rican plena rhythm, featuring accordion and piano over a standard rhythmic base and harmonic progression.  The bassline alternates between a syncopated tumbao and a half-note feel, and the piano montuno is also more downbeat oriented. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Frank Emilio.

@018 Solo Tú - A slow, very pretty, lyrical ballad in solo piano setting, accompanied by percussion. In Salsa and Brazilian music, the piano is not typically used in a solo setting. The percussion gives the piece a fuller sound. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).


@019 Afro a Cuatro. This piece demonstrates an accompaniment style which can be used with voice or any other instrument. It features an afro rhythm with the percussion (congas and bongos) playing the traditional rhythm. This style was adapted from sacred African batá drumming, and was widely interpreted in the 1940s in Cuba by charanga orchestras as well as conjuntos.  Song themes are typically lullabies. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Ignacio Berroa, 1992.

@020 Dile a Fulana, is a traditional son-montuno in a trio setting with lots of I-IV-V variations.  The son-montuno is a style developed within the Cuban son genre, and generally consists of a repeated ostinato with fairly simple harmony.  In a trio setting with drums, the Cuban percussion is absent, but implied by the hi-hat (imitating the güiro), as well as the cáscara, clave and bell patterns. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of F. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove). 

@021 Afro-Cuban Mood - A Latin-jazz style 6/8 with contemporary harmony.  After the opening theme, the vibes play a syncopated melody over the established vamp, followed by a piano solo over the jazzy chord changes.  The opening theme returns to feature a percussion solo section, followed by several horn-like lines played on the vibes before the ending. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Eddie Palmieri.

@022 Peruchineando. This is a son or popular dance style of the 50's, performed for solo piano and percussion. It begins with a danzón style before the montuno section, which is in a typical minor I-IV-V progression. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).

@023 50's Cha-cha, is a typical charanga style cha-cha circa the mid 50's which draws from the traditional setting of a vocal piece,  and features the flute and strings.  The cha-cha-chá (more commonly referred to as 'cha cha') is a rhythmic style which was created by violinist Enrique Jorrin. The scraping sounds of dancers' feet was the inspiration for the name he gave to this rhythm which was derived from the early Cuban danzon-mambo.  The piano montuno is one of the most common patterns for the interpretation of the cha-cha-chá, with an emphasis by the left hand on up-beats. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Alfredo Rodriguez.

@024 Batucada Pra Voce. Normally a percussion style played for carnival time in Brazil, the batucada is a wonderful and syncopated rhythmic foundation for any ensemble, although sometimes difficult to interpret with smaller groups. The basic ingredients consist of the repetitive surdo (large bass drum) parts, the agogo bells, ganza (shaker) and cuica (friction drum). This mellow tempo batucada features the guitar playing the melody, and a bassline outlining a minor 10th interval. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Bbm. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).

@025 Las Guajiritas. This piece features the guajira style. Primarily influenced by the Cuban tres guitar, the piano adapts the arpeggiated style and harmonizes the pattern, resulting in the presence of many sixth and tenth intervals. The piano solo is played in double octaves, a device used by acoustic players to project the solo line and punctuated by chordal shots. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Cm. Picture of Chucho Valdez.

@026 Mambo for One. This is a D minor blues mambo for solo piano and percussion. In taking on any style, the piano-as a solo instrument-must be able to insinuate the many parts and variations within a typical Latin rhythm section, including the bassline (tumbao), the melody line, as well as the piano montuno. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Papi Oviedo  .

@027 Congarama, is a traditional carnival style conga rhythm with several changes in clave direction. Typically played only by percussion instruments (which define the style), the conga is widely popular in several instrumental ensembles, and generally features slightly faster tempos than most styles.  Although this piece is not as fast as the average conga, the melody line (played by the brass) and the bass and piano lines are highly syncopated. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of C. Picture of Carnival.

@028 A Noro, is a son style for solo piano with percussion accompaniment. This piece moves between two clave directions-3-2 and 2-3-as a result of a jump in the clave direction, an idea which is generally not the norm within salsa circles.  However, with this setting, it is not as noticeable or abrupt as may be the case in a larger ensemble. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Am. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).

@029 Good Bye Bossa, is a relaxed Bossa Nova in the key of Am which reverses the clave direction to 2-3. The Bossa Nova is probably the most well known of the Brazilian styles since its inception in the early 60's when the world fell in love with the rhythm and the tunes of Antonio Carlos Jobim.  It is essentially a slower and simpler rendition of the samba and batucada styles. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Am. Picture of Clave in 2-3 direction.

@030 Sabroso, is a danceable guaracha style descarga in 3-2 clave (see Dict.) featuring dominant chord variations.  Descarga simply means "jam session" or "improvisation". The harmony alternates between dominant chords a minor third apart (D7 and F7), and features the melody played by the vibes. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Clave in 3-2.

@031 Blue Cha-cha, is a bluesy, Latin-jazz style cha-cha in quartet setting, featuring a left-hand, up-beat piano ostinato.  Although the concept of "blue notes" in salsa may be less common, Latin-jazz completely embraces blues harmony.  This piece opens with the percussion rhythm, followed by the piano playing the melody over the left-hand, up-beat ostinato. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of C. Picture of Charlie Palmieri.

@032 Mi Cumbia, is a Colombian style Cumbia rhythm, with the drums and percussion opening with a traditional pattern, followed by a pick-up into the melody (by the horns).  The bassline alternates between a downbeat-oriented pattern emphasizing beats 3 and 4 of each measure, and the piano pattern alternates between the typical, syncopated Cumbia pattern, and a more floral, arpeggiated pattern. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Gm. Picture of Danilo Perez.

@033 Nueva York Mambo, is a Latin-jazz guaracha-mambo in 3-2 clave with several II-V variations.  After the opening bass and piano line (which is echoed by the vibes), the vibes play a syncopated melody, followed by vibes and piano solos. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Ignacio Berroa.

@034 Gitanita - A Spanish gypsy-style rumba for solo piano and percussion accompaniment, reminiscent of Flamenco rumba. The merging of the traditional Afro-Cuban rhythms within this style evokes the percussive nature of this type of Spanish rhythm, which of course has its roots in African and even Afro-Cuban music.  Again, the piano in a solo context must attempt to insinuate other instruments-in this case the Spanish guitar-as well as maintain the bass ostinato in the left hand. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Am. Picture of Frank Emilio.

@035 Descargando, is an up-tempo, contemporary mambo in trio setting, with lots of dominant 13th variations and time-shifted montunos.  This modern approach to shifting the accents of the montuno pattern is very popular in new Cuban salsa, where the piano accentuates unusual accents, or cycles a pattern which appears to be in 3/4 inside a 4/4 phrase, resulting in a momentary "twisting" of the time.  It is up to the rest of the rhythm section to hold everything together! Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Bb. Picture of Tito Puente.

@036 Samba Too. This is a Brazilian Samba with a 2-3 clave direction. It also combines some elements of Afro-Cuban music - primarily in the piano patterns, which are somewhat montuno-like. This is a medium tempo samba over minor blues changes. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Gm. Picture of Clave in 2-3 direction.

@037 Funky Mambo - A bluesy mambo  quartet (piano, bass, drums & congas) which opens with a funky, back-beat rhythm, and moves into a more dance-oriented songo feel over a II - V - I - IV progression. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Cm. Picture of Rodolfo Argudin Justiz.

@038 Mi Partido. This is a quartet rendition (El. Piano, Slap bass, Flute and percussion) in the Brazilian partido alto style, with the clave in  2-3 direction. This piece features minor 11th chords, and a melody line played by the flute. Notice the pushed slap bass throughout. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Em. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).

@039 Bossa Me. Perhaps the most internationally recognized Brazilian style is the Bossa Nova, which is essentially a slower and simpler rendition of the samba and batucada styles. This bossa nova features the piano playing a very common pattern, often used in several styles (at various tempi), which begins on the "and" of beat 1 (in 3-2 clave direction). Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Clave in 3-2.

@040 Sonando - A slow, traditional 40's-era conjunto style son featuring 4-trumpet lead.  Opening with an arpeggiated piano montuno (in I-IV-V-IV progression), the rhythm section enters on the customary 4th beat (called ponche), introducing the horn melody and later solos. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of C. Picture of Machito Orchestra, 1982.

@041 Pachanga - A laid-back pachanga rhythm in a charanga ensemble, with several polyrhythmic layers over a I-I(7)-IV-V(7) progression.  The pachanga often features a syncopated line played by the majority of the ensemble, as well as pizzicato strings. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of G. Picture of Alfredo Rodriguez.
 
@042 Minor Details, is an up-tempo G minor blues mambo in trio setting, opening with the piano establishing the vamp, stating the melody and then continuing  with an extended  solo section.  The drums play an eighth-note cáscara pattern on the hi-hat. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of  Gm. Picture of Chucho Valdez.

@043 Batu-Salsa. This Brazilian sounding piece is not an actual style, but rather a hybrid of raucous Brazilian rhythm with harmony and melody lines more typically found in Afro-Cuban ("salsa") music, this piece blends a bit of both cultures into a light and up-beat batucada. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of F. Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).

@044 Bata-Montuno - A syncopated, up-beat mambo featuring piano rhythms adapted from the sacred African batá drums. The congas and bongos alternate between this feel and a standard tumbao. A blowing montuno starts at bar 47. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm . Picture of Rebeca Mauleón-Santana ((c) by David Belove).

@045 La Batidora. This exciting and lively tune is a traditional style Dominican merengue with lots of montuno variations over the standard  V-V-I-I  progression. The drums and percussion set up the rhythm with a 4 bar intro. The melody is played by the brass section. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of F. Picture of Tito Puente.

@046 La Jefa - A Latin-jazz guaracha with several changes in clave direction.  The piece opens in 3-2 clave direction, and moves to 2-3 for the solo sections over a I - VII - VI - V7 progression.  Odd measure breaks in between each section turn the clave direction around. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Cm. Picture of Danilo Perez.

@047 Danza for One - A traditional Cuban danza style for solo piano and percussion accompaniment, reminiscent of solo Cuban piano pieces of the late 19th century.  The structure of the danzón evolved from this earlier predecessor. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Gm. Picture of Juan Luis Guerra.

@048 In a Groove - A mostly D Dorian mode, Afro-Cuban/funky 6/8 vamp with plenty of harmonic colors.  In general, the piano and bass have a lot of freedom to comp around the 6/8 rhythm, alternating between more percussive patterns, and looser, chordal accompaniment. In this trio setting, the piano also plays the melody. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Dm. Picture of Tito Puente.

@049 I Got Calypso - A hybrid of calypso and son over "Rhythm" changes and other progressions, beginning with the signature agogo bell pattern on top of the typical pattern. The bassline features a pattern accentuating beats 3 and 4 of each measure. Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of F. Picture of Rodolfo Argudin Justiz.

@050 Trio Para Noro - A son style for piano trio, this piece moves between two clave directions- 3-2 and 2-3 - as a result of a jump in the clave direction, an idea which is generally not the norm within salsa circles.  However, with this setting, it is not as noticeable or abrupt as may be the case in a larger ensemble. This piece is also performed as a piano solo with percussion (A Noro). Composed and performed by Rebeca Mauleón-Santana (1997). Key of Am. Picture of a sunset.


