@001 Brian Eno\
Musician, producer, and philosopher Eno is a primal force in contemporary music. Assailing previously established musical boundaries through his involvement with Roxy Music, David Bowie, Talking Heads, and U2, Eno also created prototype New Age albums with his ambient Music Series, synthesizing elements of rock, minimalism, and electronics. "Here come the Warm Jets" and "Taking Tiger Mountain by Strategy" in 1973 featured Eno's progressive compositions as well as a stellar cast of Guest musicians, including Robert Fripp, Andy MacKay, John Wetton, and Phil Collins. But it was 1975's "Another Green World" that found him concentrating his studio talents on the subtle colorations of the synthesizer rather than vocally oriented electro-pop tunes. The music was subtle, lush, nonintrusive, a forerunner to today's New Age Space music. "Discreet Music" continued this trend. "I was trying to make a piece that could be listened to and yet ignored...in the image of Satie who wanted to make music that could 'mingle with the sound of knives and forks at dinner.'" The album's soothing quality arises from two simple melodic lines, digitally processed to create waves of uplifting and inspiring sounds. Of the popular "Music for Airports", another ambient release that gives a sense of place rather than story line in terms of composition, Eno says, "One of the things music can do is change your sense of time so you don't really mind if things slip away or alter in some way. It's about getting rid of people's nervousness." His collaboration with Harold Budd and Laraaji on the rest of the Ambient Music Series (On Land, Day of Radiance, and Plateaux of Mirror) has achieved some of the most achingly beautiful and haunting ethereal audio images put to tape.

@002 Constance Demby\
This visual/musical artist began formal meditation practice in the seventies and used the experience to develop spacious new forms of contemporary classical music. After experimenting with many ethnic acoustic instruments, Demby designed and constructed two large scale sonic steel instruments: the "Space Bass" and the "Whale Sail". The deep, otherworldly sounds that resonated from these instruments gave her the foundation on which to pioneer a whole new plane of sacred and meditative music. In 1982 she combined dulcimer, piano, and synthesizer to create the brilliant, inspirational original compositions of one of the first New Age classic recordings, "Sacred Space Vol. 1". It encouraged listeners to go inside themselves, to explore their own budding spirituality, "Going inside means looking at your inner self," comments Demby. "You have to temporarily give up ego control and allow the music to take you into perhaps new and unexplored territories." In 1986 came "Novus Magnificat", another New Age classic recording that is still topping radio play lists everywhere. This tour de force is a favorite among space music fans, too, as it features a host of synthesizers, percussion, organ, strings, and a chorus of voices created by Demby, plus some electronic effects by Michael Stearns. The record is a New Age symphony, articulating humanity's highest spiritual potentials. Stories abound of the positive effects Novus Magnificat has had on its listeners, and there have even been testimonials from doctors and nurses about its beneficial effects in hospitals. As Demby proclaims, "Music is the highest of the arts," it helps "make a connection of spirit through sound, transporting ourselves to our higher reaches, ascending through the music to the great overview."
@003 Wendy (aka Walter) Carlos\
Predating New Age music's fascination with synthesizer textures by two decades, Carlos' work has changed the way we make and hear electronic music. Her revolutionary album, Switched on Bach, a mid-sixties collaboration with Bob Moog, was a breakthrough for the genre, proving to the world that synthesizers could indeed create music rather than sound effects or interesting noise. Since then Carlos has helped develop more than a dozen electronic instruments and processes that she uses extensively on her recordings. She has also thrown off the tuning and timbre restraints that date back more than two hundred years and has created hybrid synthesized voices such as metal marimba, woodwind glockenspiel, and bowed timpani. Divided into four seasons, "Sonic Seasonings" blends computer music with live nature sounds into a soothing, ambient mix perfect for relaxation, meditation, and massage. With its haunting wolf cries and icy, crystalline desolation, the selection "Winter" is especially moving. The more recent Beauty in the Beast is an aural journey inspired by the exotic sounds of Bali, Africa, India, and the Middle East. Carlos's sometimes eerie, often lovely, lyrical instrumental stylings also have been featured on film soundtracks, notably for Stanley Kubrick's films "A Clockwork Orange" and "The Shining". While her style expands and mutates with each new record, Carlos seems to enjoy incorporating classical themes and warm, organic world music instrumentation into her electronic repertoire. Her search for "new" sounds is exhaustive but yields a perfect blend of art and science.

@004 Richard Souther (aka Douglas Trowbridge)\
Let's get it straight: Richard Souther is Douglas Trowbridge, and both record for Meadowlark Records. Souther creates New Age synthesizer music while his alter ego, Trowbridge, is known for his New Age acoustic piano records, notably the uplifting "Songs Unspoken". Piano and keyboards have fascinated Souther since he began playing at the age of two. Discovering computers and synthesizers in the eighties, he turned his prodigious talents toward making humanistic electronic music. On "Heirborne", Israeli, Irish, and British influences are evident throughout his original compositions. Those who summarily dismiss synthesizers as too mechanical haven't listened to the compelling emotional selections on this album. As Souther explains, "I prefer the synthesizer over other instruments because of its expressiveness. For Heirborne I used 20 of them."

@005 William Ackerman\
A hydraulic engineer-turned-guitar player, Ackerman began Windham Hill records by distributing 300 of his own cassettes to neighbors in Palo Alto, California. He is now CEO of Windham Hill Productions which includes Magenta Records, Lost Lake Arts Records, Open Air Records, and of course, Windham Hill, the best known New Age record label. His music cuts across folk, jazz, and European classicism, and he is widely considered a pioneer of New Age music in the United States. His captivating steel-string picking is original and uplifting. Ackerman himself describes his sixth album, "Conferring with the Moon", as a synthesis of everything he can remember. Passage emphasizes stirring chords and rich and mellow steel-string guitar work through peaceful and melodic instrumentals. Adding accents to Ackerman's performance are violins, cello, piano, and English horn.

@006 Paul Winter\
Winter's music cannot be distinguished from his philosophy: "Through music the diverse cultures of the world can find common ground." To that end he combines elements of classical, jazz, and international folk traditions with themes drawn from the natural environment. Winter's career began during college when he formed the jazz group, the Paul Winter Sextet. The group recorded numerous albums for Columbia Records and became one of the first jazz bands to play the White House. Subsequently, Winter decided to create a new performance entity that reflected his evolving concern for cultural unity and environmental harmony. In 1967 the Paul Winter Consort was launched. The Beatles' producer, George Martin, worked with the Consort on Icarus. Now considered a New Age classic, this ground-breaking release mixed jazz, rock, pop, and symphonic elements into a majestic, sweeping fusion of sound suitable for the popular "mind voyaging" activities of the time. Based on the ancient Greek myth, Icarus is a musical interpretation of the rise and fall of youthful ambition. Piano, guitar, organ, drums, and accent instruments create densely layered arrangements that should be appreciated through focused listening, preferably with headphones. Ten years later, "Common Ground" became the first Paul Winter Consort album to mix the actual voices of animals and the sounds of nature into the rhythmic, world music-influenced compositions. Expanding this concept, Callings features the voices of thirteen different sea mammals woven into the suitably liquid and flowing instrumental tracks; keyboards, guitar, and flute blend in perfect harmony with the sounds of whales, dolphins, and other creatures. One of Winter's less appreciated achievements is recognizing great talent; during Consort's existence, many fine musicians have been members and then gone on to release successful solo records or form chart-topping groups making him without question a founding father of New Age music.

@007 Andreas Vollenweider\
Drawing from his experience in scoring nature documentaries, harpist Vollenweider endeavors to create a calm, supportive sonic atmosphere on each of his releases, In general, Vollenweider's compositions are structurally simple but gain texture through the multitimbred orchestrations of his talented ensemble, who add percussion, brass, and woodwinds. Having modified his electro-acoustic harp so that he can program each string differently, Vollenweider is able to create unusual customized sounds for a unique and identifiable aural personality. He has also doctored the koto (the Japanese stringed instrument most similar to a guitar) by replacing the traditional silk strings with steel and adding electronic pickups. Using a minimum of synthesizers on his albums, Vollenweider prefers an alternative approach to texture, mixing percussion, keyboards, brass, and woodwinds to center stage harp. The poignant and luscious "Down to the Moon", which won the 1987 Grammy Award for Best New Age  Recording includes a series of transitory, Zen-inspired impressions that relax, inspire, and gently energize. Vollenwieder told Jazziz magazine that there is a parallel between the music and the moon, both being capable of "touching the flow of moods and propelling the times of change."

@008 Kitaro (Masanori Takahashi)\
Kitaro is a multi-instrumentalist, a composer, and one of the foremost exponents of New Age music. Although his style defies categorization, it features elements of romantic Western classical, traditional acoustic, and electronic music as well as sounds derived directly from nature. His records have sold tens of millions of copies and his followers have contributed healing powers to his music. The Silk Road releases have become New Age classics, using both modern and traditional instruments to evoke the period, more than two thousand years ago, when trade between East and West began, reminding the listener that spiritual ideals were exchanged along with material goods. "Tunhuang" features Kitaro on various synthesizers, guitar, sitar, santool, drums. Irish harp, and wind chimes, among other instruments, creating a gentle web of wonder."The Light of the Spirit" (co-produced by the Grateful Dead's Mickey Hart) continues the meditation and reflection on childhood that Kitaro began on Tenku, and explores his visions of life, death, and rebirth, the harmonies and tensions of the created and creative universe. A practicing Buddhist and reported devotee of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, Kitaro states, "I was always a universalist in my outlook." His reverence for the natural world and its beauty is in evidence on his recordings; of his twenty-four track home recording studio he says, "I open up the windows when I record and let everything in -- the air, the sounds of birds and rustling leaves. Nature informs the music, and the music travels outdoors to inform nature." What drives Kitaro is a vision of world peace: "People create [wars],people who have a war within themselves. I want to create music that eases the war within....Music has a transformative capacity, You can change [your] karma through music."

@009 Steve Kindler\
Imagine windsurfing, sailing, and swimming in clear blue water where friendly dolphins and whales frolic beneath the surface. Now listen to the acoustic blend of New Age Jazz and classical instrumental music of violinist Kindler and guitarist Teja Bell onDolphin Smiles. Kindler shares his inspiration for this release: "I wrote [it] after hearing Jacques Cousteau tell about diving to the bottom of the ocean and seeing a perfect circle of dolphins standing up with their tails touching the sand like they were meditating." The fluid melody lines on the record are developed through a close interplay between violin and guitar, creating rich textures and lush, sparkling soundscapes. A former member of the Mahavishnu Orchestra, Kindler says of group founder John McLaughlin, "[He] is a tremendous artist and major influence on my life, music, and spiritual outlook. I began meditation and learned that music is a spiritual pathway that takes concentration and mind control just like meditation." Kindler has also recorded with Cat Stevens, Jeff Beck, and Jan Hammer.

@010 Jean-Michel Jarre\
The work of European synthesist Jarre has been a profound influence on most popular synthesizer-based bands today. Jarre's pop-rock album Oxygene, rocketed to the top of the charts in 1976 and led to the worldwide acceptance of popular electronic music, synthesizers, and cutting edge technology. Oxygene offers vocal and instrumental selections that feature densely textured synthesizer arrangements and percolating percussion suitable for dancing. As the first Westerner to have his music broadcast on radio in the People's Republic of China, Jarre was later to tour there and record a double live album, The Concerts in China. Including some of Jarre's greatest hits, it features a special composition for a thirty-four piece Chinese using two-string lutes, and flutes. The sound is intriguingly visual, exotic, and lovely to hear. His next album, Music for Supermarkets, was recorded in the usual way, but Jarre -- after pressing only one record -- had all the printing and lacquering machinery destroyed. The single disc was then auctioned off for charity. Rendez-vous features a special musical theme: the history of Houston, Texas, in three movements -- rural space, urban space, outer space. The synthesist sculpts each section into a separate but linked sonic overview complete with both passionate and pastoral highlights. The best introduction to Jarre's work is The Essential Jean-Michel Jarre compilation, which concentrates on upbeat, chakra-stimulating instrumentals performed on the computers and synthesizers of that era. Fans of Yanni and Vangelis will enjoy the detailed articulation and rich aural majesty of The Essential's progressive synthesizer arrangements.

@011 Paul Horn\
In 1960, when Horn was still playing jazz, a seventy-year-old woman gave him a psychic reading predicting the rise of a new kind of music. According to Horn, she said, "The purpose of this music will be to raise the level of awareness on the planet. It will be uplifting to the spirit and have the power to raise the vibration of mankind." In that vein, Traveller is a seminal New Age work. It unburdens the spirit, making the listener feel calm, relaxed, centered, and full of inner peace. Blending sitar, tablas, Chinese bamboo flute, and a European string orchestra, the album is an aural record of travel between widely disparate countries and cultures. Tempos change to reflect  specific moods and ambiences, taking the listener on a well-paced trip around the world with many opportunities for enlightenment and self-awareness. Horn is also a pioneering flutist, having recorded in some of the world's most famous "power" spots such as inside the Great Pyramid and at Findhorn, the Scottish New Age community. In 1968 he recorded the classic solo flute album Inside the Taj Mahal. His instrument sounds alternately eerie, sweet, and richly resonant; the single notes seem to hang by an invisible thread as they sustain within the echoing chamber. Much of Horn's music is improvised, drawing upon immediate inspiration and location, so his records sound fresh and alive.

@012 Georgia Kelly\
Georgia Kelly is largely responnsible for the modern resurgence in popularity of harp music. Historically the harp has been a symbol of peace and serenity, figuring predominantly in the myths and stories of ancient times. A classically trained musician and composer, Kelly has invoked this tradition to create music that positively affects the mind, body, and spirit. To this end she formed her own record labe, Heru, as well as provided the musical background on two albums of guided meditation - Woman Spirit with Hallie Iglehart and Rainbow Butterfly with Dr. Emmet Miller. Kelly's New Age calssic recording "Seapeace" is a collection of musical meditations and etudes for solo harp that blends Eastern and Western musical idioms, using natural sounds and violin to bring out the tidal motion of the melody. "Eros and Logos", inspired by Kelly's deep interest in Jungian psychology, mythology, and dance, examines the eternal struggle between reason and emotion. Kelly's music has also gained recognition for its therapeutic effects and is used extensively in hospitals and mental health facilities. This is music that inspires the heart and provides the mind with a peaceful place to rest.

@013 Jarrett, Keith \ Keith Jarrett was born on May 8, 1945 in Allentown, Pennsylvania. Keith started studying classical piano at a very early age and very soon became a child prodigy performing his first concert at age six. As he says himself: "I grew up with the piano, I learned it's language while I learned to speak". He studied at Berklee School of Music in Boston with Ray Santisi whose playing he admired. He spent a lot of time accompanying vocalists with his trio and soon was heard by saxophonist Charles Lloyd. He went on the road with Lloyd and recorded a triumphant set in '66 at the Monterey Jazz Festival which was released under the title "Forest Flower". Keith's playing on this record took the Jazz world by storm.  In '67 he recorded "Life Between the Exit Signs" which established him as a leader. He already had a very well developed sense of style. In 1970 he replaced Chick Corea with Miles Davis in a band which included Jack DeJohnette. The albums Live Evil and Miles Davis at Fillmore were recorded during this period.  He recorded solo albums, The Koln Concert and Solo- Concerts, Bremen & Lausanne in 1971 on ECM which were also milestone albums at the time because Jarrett seemingly improvised the entire sets without any stopping.  His music was very approachable and romantic and these records gained Jarrett a worldwide host of new fans. After all of the electric and synthesizer sounds of the '70's Jarrett's solo concert albums created a market for the sound of the grand piano again. More recently, he has teamed up with bassist Gary Peacock and his old drummer friend, Jack DeJohnette to produce a series of records of standards. This marks a distinctive break with the long period of solo concerts which were starting to become a little overbearing and self-indulgent. These trio albums raise the art of the Jazz trio to the kind of level of consistency not heard of since Bill Evans. Discography: Charles Lloyd, Dream Weaver - Atlantic; Miles Davis, Live/Evil - Columbia/CBS; Miles Davis, At Fillmore - Columbia/CBS; Facing You - ECM; The Koln Concert - ECM; Solo - Concerts, Bremen & Lausanne, ECM; In The Night - ECM; Luminescence - ECM; Arbour Zena - ECM; Ruta & Daitya - ECM; Belonging - ECM; Expectations - Columbia; Fort Yawuh - Impulse; Treasure Island - Impulse; Birth - Atlantic; Death and the Flower - Impulse; Backhand - Impulse; Mysteries - Impulse; Shades - Impulse; Staircase - ECM.

@014 Corea, Chick \ Chick Corea was born in Boston, Massachusetts in 1941.  His father was a jazz musician.  His earliest influences were Horace Silver and Bud Powell.  His early classical training allowed strands of  Debussy, Bartok, Stravinsky, and Ravel to show through.  During the early '60's he played in Latin and Afro-Cuban groups like Mongo Santamaria, Willie Bobo and Herbie Mann. Later in the '60's Chick played with Blue Mitchell and Stan Getz.  Two of his compositions, Litha and Windows,  were recorded on the session for "Sweet Rain".  Time spent with Miles Davis' group during his transition to jazz-rock saw Chick sharing electric keyboard duties with Joe Zawinal on such albums as Bitches Brew and In a Silent Way.  Tones For Joan's Bones, an album with Woody Shaw, Joe Farrell and Joe Chambers, recorded in the 60's, shows off his fierce energetic playing style.  In 1970 he formed the group Circle with Anthony Braxton, Dave Holland and Barry Altschul and so began a change in direction to free interplay. Feeling limited and confined, Chick left the group in 1971 to record a couple of solo albums for ECM. The album Light As A Feather, featured Chick's most famous tune to date, "Spain" which is a Samba with a flowing and memorable melody punctuated by a very rhythmical unison interlude sans bass and drums. Other well-known Corea tunes are: What Was; Windows; Armando's Rumba; Open Your Eyes, You Can Fly; Senor Mouse; Times Lie.  The group Return to Forever featured Joe Farrell, reeds; Stanley Clarke, bass; Airto Moreira, percussion; Brazilian singer Flora Purim and of course, Chick on keyboards. Discography: Now He Sings, Now He Sobs; Sweet Rain (with Stan Getz); In a Silent way and Bitches Brew (with Miles Davis); Light As A Feather (with Gary Burton); 

@015 Deep Forest\
The tribal chanting rhythms of the African peoples echo through the ambient sounds of Deep Forest. The French team of Michel Sanchez and Eric Mouquet combine the African and Pygmy folk music with contemporary electronic sounds. Starting with the human sounds (vocals, chants, etc.) Deep Forest creates  unique effects by adding on rhythm and music in layers, drawing for ideas on African folklore such as Cameroon's Baka music. A percentage of procedes from their first album, "Deep Forest" have been sent to the Pygmy Fund based in Malibu, California..

@016 Enigma\
The music of Enigma has been described as a collage of feelings, rhythms, and sounds of the new age. Formed in 1990, with the release of their album  "MCMXC", the members of Enigma at first kept their identities hidden from the public. Some speculated that the band was the creation of Michael Oldfield or Alan Parsons. But it is in fact the work of classically-educated Romanian Michael Cretu and French pop singer Sandra Lauer. Working from their home in Ibiza, Spain, they produce beautiful ambient music based on Gregorian chant, pan flutes, and Sandra's soft French lyrics and trilled vocals.  

@017 Enya\
Irish-born Enya (born Eithne Ni Bhraonain, 1961)  comes from a musical family. Several of her brothers and uncles make up the internationally famous Irish band "Clannad", which Enya herself worked with for a time in the early 1980's. She went out on her own in 1982, and in 1985 wrote the music for the film "The Frog Prince".  The next year, when the BBC began a project centered on the cultural influence of the Celts, Enya was commissioned to write music for the TV series. In 1987 this music was released as her first album, under the tile "Enya" (later re-mastered in 1992 as "The Celts"). In 1988 she had a major New Age hit with Orinoco Flow. She continues to be a major force in music, working with producer/arranger Nick Ryan and his wife Roma, who writes the lyrics.

@018 Michael Oldfield\
Michael Oldfield was born in 1953 in Reading England. As a teenager, he experimented with a tape recorder and learned how to do multiple tracks on a single track machine by blocking the erase head. His symphonic-like creations attracted the attention of Richard Branson, founder of Virgin Records, who was looking for innovative artists. The result was Tubular Bells (1973), a breakthrough in alternative music featuring only two tracks, each 20 minutes long. In 1978, Oldfield composed music for "Reflections", a film about Stonehenge and other ancient sacred places. He also has the unusual distinction of having an asteroid named after him.

@018 Vangelis\
One of several Greek ambient artists, Vangelis was born in 1943 in the town of Volos. He avoids the limelight but uses his success to support such causes as the preservation of the Acropolis. He is best known for his magnificent score for the movie "Chariots of Fire", and also wrote the music for "Bladerunner".  A notable collaboration with Jon Anderson of Yes resulted in "The Friends of Mr. Cairo" (1981).  Although he is a friend of both Anderson and Rick Wakeman, Vangelis never played with Yes except for an impromptu 15-minute jam session on drums. Much more the solo artist than a band member, Vangelis continues to be a major force in the music soundtrack industry and one of the most popular New Age artists in the world today.

@019 Yanni\
Yannis Hrisomallis has created a style of music all his own and is considered one of the most innovative and evocative composer/performers in the present time. His music strives to evoke feelings of the inner spirit of man, inspire people to get in touch with their emotions, and explore their potential as human beings. Born in Kalamata, Greece in 1954, he moved to the United States in 1972 where he obtained a degree in Psychology at the University of Minnesota. His first band, started after he finished university, was Chameleon, in which he played keyboard. He now divides his time between his recording studio in Los Angeles and Seattle where he lives with actress Linda Evans. A current project, composing work for Olympic Games productions, has an unusual footnote: Yanni himself was at one time very close to an Olympic career himself, having set a Greek National freestyle swimming record at the age of 14. 


@020 PJ Birosik\
PJ Birosik is the author of "The New Age Music Guide"(Macmillan) and a music reviewer for numerous print and on-line publications. She is the founder of "Musik International Corporation" which represents numerous New Age artists. Biographical material for the following artists has been reproduced with permission from "The New Age Music Guide": William Ackerman, Wendy Carlos, Constance Demby, Brian Eno, Paul Horn, Jean-Michel Jarre, Georgia Kelly, Steve Kindler, Kitaro, Richard Souther, Adreas Vollenweider, and Paul Winter.
@
