
@001 Spring, is performed in the key of G. This tune, which has an Irish lilt, makes use of melodic repetition over an arpeggiated left hand. 

@002 Shoji, is played in Dm. Notice the Japanese Koto effect,  the use of space and the meditative mode.

@003 La Pluie. Performed in Eb, this piece has a 'rainy day' feel. The style of this Debussy-like folk song is impressionistic.
 
@004 Fairytales. Played in the key of G, this child-like melody utilizes a simple, repetitive chord progression.

@005 Sea Voyage, in the key of A, makes use of a left-hand ostinato on an A2 chord. This is an A major chord to which the 2nd (B) has been added. This rendition suggests a spacious, rolling ocean feel. 

@006 Prairie Morning, is performed in the key of F. A spacious and majestic feeling is conveyed with the use of country and church type chords.

@007 New Orleans. This piece in Gm is performed with a left-hand stride and conveys a kind of Spanish, bluesy feel.

@008 Saudi, is performed in the key of C. This rendition makes use of Arabian rhythms and an Arabian-type of scale over a C drone.

@009 Dream Song, in the key of B, is reminiscent of Erik Satie's 'Gymnopedies'. It features a slow, left-hand stride similar to that played by Bill Evans in his 'Peace Piece'. 

@010 Giants. This piece is played in the key of E major and conveys a mystical and dream-like feeling with rolling and thundering chords.

@011 Whirlpools, in Bb minor uses a 'whirling', melodic device as a motif (or idea). 

@012 Autumn's Coming. This rendition is performed in F major, in George Winston style. It utilizes a simple, repeated melody over a left-hand guitar style accompaniment.

@013 Sofia, is played in Am. This tune, in a fast, 3/4 tempo, features an Am to F7 progression.

@014 Country Chapel. Performed in Gb, this is a very soft and gentle hymn-type piece.
 
@015 Horizons, in G, features a melody (based on a G major scale) which conveys a spacious mood. The left hand plays a drone-like effect. 

@016 El Escoral, is performed in Ab. The chord progression here is of a Spanish, Flamenco nature (C, Db, and Eb). The C Phrygian scale (an Ab scale starting on C) conveys that Spanish feeling.

@017 Gypsy Tears, in Fm uses Romanian melodic devices to convey a melancholy feeling.

@018 Winter of Our Love, is performed in F#m. This gentle piece conveys a 'classical' mood and features a left-hand ostinato (repeated bass figure).

@019 The Strand, is played in E. In this piece the melody develops gradually with the left hand playing an ostinato in the style of Keith Jarrett.

@020 Ice Petals. This piece, in Dm, is played freely and employs a Japanese mode. 

@021 Within, is performed in the key of G. This composition makes use of country riffs and is played with a Keith Jarrett influence (Koln Concerts). 

@022 Arizona Trail, is played in the key of B major. This very rhythmic-sounding piece utilizes a B pentatonic melody over a left-hand, ostinato accompaniment.

@023 Koto. Performed in G#m, this rendition is based on a Japanese scale. It features a meditative conversation between the right and left hands.

@024 Highland, in the key of D, is a Scottish-type ballad which is influenced by 'Ye Banks and Brays'.

@025 Totem, is performed in Ebm. This piece makes use of strong fifths in the left hand with high fifths in the right hand to imitate a Native Indian tale.

@026 Lake Athabasca, in C, employs a right-hand ostinato (repeated figure) based on a C2 arpeggio. The left hand slowly plays bass octaves under the right hand.

@027 Cassandra.  This piece in Gm, is played in a rubato fashion (i.e.: played freely without a steady rhythm). It is classical in style, inspired by Bach.

@028 Rites of Spring, is performed in Em. Inspired by Joni Mitchell, this piece captures the mood of a cold, spring day.

@029 Search, is played in F major. This is one of three compositions by Oliver Gannon in this program, the rest having been written by Miles Black. This piece uses modern harmonies to create a searching quality. Notice the F major9#11 chord which begins this piece. This Lydian sound is sometimes written as G/F.

@030 The Sun Rose Tomorrow, is performed in Db and creates a gentle, sleepy mood.

@031 Minuet, in Bb, is played with a gentle 6/8 feel and features a pretty, lilting melody.

@032 Kalahari, is played in Em. This is a droning, rhythmical piece which utilizes an E Dorian mode (a D scale, starting on E).

@033 Once We Knew the Words, in C, is a spacious, country ballad, played in the style of the Keith Jarrett Koln concerts.

@034 Rainbow Sky, is performed in the key of D. This piece is played in the high register to create an 'up high' atmosphere.

@035 Deep Forest. Performed in Em, this song makes use of low, deep tones to simulate a dark, mysterious mood.

@036 Sara's Song. This piece is performed in the key of Ab. It conveys a gentle, 'ballerina' feeling.

@037 Castles. Performed in the key of Am, this rendition uses an interesting Pat Metheny-style chord progression.

@038 Tibet, in the key of D, uses fourths in the right hand to create an Oriental feel.
 
@039 Spyral Gyral, is played in Cm. The fast 6/8 feel creates a spiraling effect.

@040 Isle of Dreams. This rhythmic piece, performed in E major utilizes a repeated melody and motif development.

@041 East of Mauritius. This composition is performed in Eb. It is freely played and features a 'sitar' effect.

@042 Chakra. This very meditative and spacious composition is played in the key of G.

@043 Evening Bells, is played in the key of E. Bell-like piano sounds are used here to create the mood of this piece.

@044 Destiny, is played in Ab. This Vangelis-type theme makes use of a left hand ostinato over an Ab pedal.

@045 Toccata, is performed in the key of F and uses the 'toccata' effect on piano.

@046 Pomegranate Flower, is played in Cm. Through the use of Lydian chords (i.e.: chords which use a #11) a very spacious and thoughtful mood is achieved. 

@047 Topaz. Performed in the key of A, this piece is played in a bright, 12/8 tempo to create a 'Mayan' atmosphere.

@048 Fuchsia. This Erik Satie-influenced piece, in the key of C, is performed in a very slow and ruminative fashion.

@049 Faerie. Performed in Gb, this is a sprightly, Celtic type of piece which features a 6/8 dance feel.

@050 Under the Southern Cross, is performed in the key of Db. Hymn-like, expansive, spacious and floating are some of the moods conveyed by this piece.

@051 The Promise, performed in the key of F, is a modern Bill Evans-type of ballad, played rubato. Notice the improvisation in the middle section and the complex harmonies.

@052 Spirit Quest. Performed in Db, this is a medium Latin flavored piece in the Metheny/Lyle Mays style.

@053 Celtic Skies, in the key of E, is a brisk, Keith Jarrett-inspired Celtic romp.

@054 Rooms Within, is played in the key of Em. This rhythmically interesting piece features a 5/4 tempo alternating with a 7/4 tempo.

@055 Ice Demons, in G#m, is a bright, 'fairy-like' composition with classical overtones.

@056 Moments Linger, is performed in the key of G. Note the subtle shift in keys in this Dave Grusin-style piece and a solo between the choruses.

@057 SunDance. This piece is performed in the key of F. The syncopated left hand provides a drum-like pulse under the 'epic' sounding melody.

@058 Skyward. This piece in D major and D minor, is inspired by the group 'Oregon' and features chords alternated over a drone rhythm in D.

@059 Reflections. Played in the key of F, this composition is loosely based on the kind of chord progression found in tunes like Bill Evans' 'Blue In Green'. It is very rubato and pensive.

@060 Ribbon of Dreams. Performed in the key of F#m, this Keith Jarrett, Koln Concert-inspired piece features a very dark and European mood.

@061 The River, in Eb, is a fast, 5/4, busy, rhythmic piece with rock influences.

@062 Ireland. This piece, in Gb, invokes a feeling of the Irish countryside. This is one of three pieces written by  Oliver Gannon included in this program. All other compositions were written by Miles Black who also performed all pieces.

@063 Far Above, is performed in the key of A. This composition, in 3/4, is influenced by Keith Jarrett's playing and features key changes throughout.

@064 So Long Miguel, is played in Db and inspired by tunes like Steve Swallow's 'Hello Bolinas'. Note the Bartok-type dissonance and the use of 6ths throughout. 

@065 Sorcerers' Assistant, is played in the key of C. This jazz-rock piece is inspired by tunes like Keith Jarrett's 'The Magician in You'. 

@066 Country Detour, is performed in the key of E. This tune is one of three pieces by Oliver Gannon included in this program. All other compositions were written by Miles Black who also performed all pieces. It features a spacious, chordal melody over an eighth note left hand.
 
@067 Ascencion, is performed in Eb. This free improvisation in a bright eighth note style, is inspired by tunes like Steve Swallow's 'Falling Grace'.

@068 Midnight. Performed in Eb, this is a contrapuntal type of ballad improvisation over complex harmonies.

@069 April Rain, is performed in the key of Cm. This is a thematic improvisation over changes inspired by the harmonies found in tunes like Steve Swallow's 'Eiderdown'.

@070 Swan Song, in Bb, is a free improvisation played loosely over harmonies which are  reminiscent of those found in tunes like 'Stella By Starlight' and 'Yours is My Heart Alone'.





