@216  Variations Sérieuses (1841) is Mendelssohn's most frequently performed piano work. They are a superb example of the Variation form, sitting easily alongside the great sets by Beethoven and Brahms. Piano virtuosity is never exploited for the sake of virtuosity, although one finds many characteristic keyboard techniques used, including staccato, syncopation, melody within inner voices, chord passages and broken octaves. In Variation 12, the pairs of repeated chords for alternating hands hints at the innovations of Liszt. Mendelssohn's thorough command of piano technique combined with melodic charm and harmonic ingenuity has assured his importance in the history of piano music.

@217  The Italian word "scherzo" refers to a witty character or a joke. The scherzo form in music gained popularity through Beethoven's use of it in Sonatas and Symphonies, replacing the traditional minuet. With Chopin the Scherzo undergoes another transformation. Far from being witty or humorous, they are towering tragic narratives revealing the composer's deepest inner conflicts. No. 2 in B-flat minor (composed in 1837) is the best known of the Chopin's four Scherzos. It makes many technical demands - rhythmic chord playing, singing legato in the lyrical alternating melody of the main section, and brilliant finger work. This remarkable work travels the whole range from simplicity to high drama.

@218  Chopin's Berceuse, composed in 1843 and first published in 1845, is a masterful work for the piano. Amazingly, the harmonic underpinning consists mainly of a simple alternation of tonic and dominant chords. But it is in the limitless imagination of the figuration where lies the genius. Grace notes, trills, ascending and descending arabesques, and many more delicate pianistic manipulations, spin the melody into a complex and brightly woven musical fabric. It is attractiveness makes it a joy for the listener as well as a gratifying experience for the performer. What else could one ask of music?

@219  Debussy released his collection of piano music called Estampes  (Pagodes, Soirée dans Grenade, Jardins sous la pluie) in 1903. Jardins sous la pluie (Gardens in the rain) is a brilliant display of colorful pianism. The rapid sixteenth notes build to a stormy climax. The central episode. with the dripping raindrops, lies nicely under the hands and is very effective. Debussy cleverly mixes two French folk tunes into the fluid harmonies ("Nous n'irons plus au Bois" and "Do do, l'enfant do").

@220  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the great virtuoso pianists of the 20th century and an accomplished composer, especially for his own instrument. It is natural that he created difficult transcriptions of favorite works by other composers to perform in his own concerts, much as Liszt had done in the 19th century. The sentimental Liebesfreud and Liebesleid by his contemporary violinist Fritz Kreisler are wonderfully done.

@221  In the music of Emmanuel Chabrier (1841-1894), one can find the germs of Impressionism. His music has sparkling vitality and fantasy infused with rhythmic energy. In addition, his fertile imagination created strange harmonic color effects.  His pieces use the straightforward A B A plan of the minuet or scherzo. In his Bourrée fantasque (1891), Chabrier  preserves the duple meter of the classic bourrée, if not the true rhythm. This animated  piece is an attractive journey into virtuoso piano sound.

@222  Italian pianist and composer Muzio Clementi (1752-1832) has sometimes been called the father of modern pianoforte playing. He certainly developed a reputation throughout Europe as one of the finest living pianists, even the equal of Mozart (although the latter dismissed Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). He did have the admiration of many composers, including Beethoven (who studied Clementi's Sonatas carefully). His musically appealing piano Sonatinas are still basic repertoire in the training of young pianists. The six Sonatinas, Op. 36, have become especially popular. No. 6 in D only has two movements, dispensing with the slow. The lengthy and often played opening movement, Allegro con spirito, more than makes up for the omission. Its melodies are memorable and unusually well developed.

@223  La puerto del vino, from Debussy's Preludes Book 2 (1913), conjures a picture of a Spanish cabaret dancer. There is continuous rhythmic vitality and superb exploitation of piano sonorities. It is one of the most effective of the Preludes. Like Chopin, Debussy composed twenty-four Preludes (twelve in each of two books).

@224  Hommage à Rameau is the second piece from Debussy's first set of Images (1905). It is a beautiful, serene Sarabande with a wonderful mix of modal and pentatonic melody and contemporary harmony. Of his Images Book 1, Debussy wrote, "I think I may say, without undue pride, that I believe that these three pieces will live and will take their place in piano literature, either to the left of Schumann or to the right of Chopin."

@225  Scott Joplin's (1868-1917) Maple Leaf Rag may be the most famous of all piano rags. It certainly sparked Joplin's success as a ragtime composer. He composed it in 1899, naming it after a Chicago dance hall called the Maple Leaf Club. The sheet music sold so well that Joplin was able to move to St. Louis, settle down and devote himself to composition. In the end, Joplin left behind about 50 piano rags, a few songs, waltzes, marches and even the first ragtime operas (A Guest of Honor and Treemonisha).

@226  Chopin's twenty-four Preludes, Op. 28, were composed from 1836-8 and first published in 1839. They are very much like Bach's preludes in the Well-Tempered Clavier, not in technical style but in basic concept. In keeping with his predecessor, Chopin wrote twenty-four of them (plus another two later on), one in every possible key. Often the prelude is based on a single idea, sometimes only a motive. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes do not precede anything. They are self-contained musical pictures. Heard as a set, they form a rainbow of changing expression. Heard individually, each is an inspired capsule of artistic emotion. One of the difficulties of No. 21 in B-flat is the smooth, double note accompaniment.

@227  Chopin's twenty-four Preludes, Op. 28, were composed from 1836-8 and first published in 1839. They are very much like Bach's preludes in the Well-Tempered Clavier, not in technical style but in basic concept. In keeping with his predecessor, Chopin wrote twenty-four of them (plus another two later on), one in every possible key. Often the prelude is based on a single idea, sometimes only a motive. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes do not precede anything. They are self-contained musical pictures. Heard as a set, they form a rainbow of changing expression. Heard individually, each is an inspired capsule of artistic emotion. No. 28 in C-sharp minor is a short whirlwind of light finger passages.

@228  Chopin's twenty-four Preludes, Op. 28, were composed from 1836-8 and first published in 1839. They are very much like Bach's preludes in the Well-Tempered Clavier, not in technical style but in basic concept. In keeping with his predecessor, Chopin wrote twenty-four of them (plus another two later on), one in every possible key. Often the prelude is based on a single idea, sometimes only a motive. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes do not precede anything. They are self-contained musical pictures. Heard as a set, they form a rainbow of changing expression. Heard individually, each is an inspired capsule of artistic emotion. No. 6 in B minor features a left hand cello-like melody with the right hand serving as the accompanist. 

@229  Handel, like every other Baroque composer, wrote many Suites. In 1720, he put together a set of eight. No. 5 in E major includes a Prelude, Allemande and Courante, omits the usual Sarabande, and ends with  the popular Air & five Variations that sometimes is referred to as "The Harmonious Blacksmith". One story has it that an English publisher named Lintern who wanted to associate Handel's name with his father, a music publisher, former blacksmith and admirer of the composer. Another story has it that the publisher himself was a former blacksmith.

@230  Italian composer Tommaso Albinoni's (1671-1750) produced great quantities of instrumental music and over fifty operas, even attracting the admiring attention of J.S. Bach (who actually used some of Albinoni's melodies in his own music).  The Adagio in G minor for organ and strings has become very popular. The problem is that Albinoni never actually wrote the piece. He did sketch out elements of the music and the 20th century Italian musicologist Remo Giazotto found a fragment of the manuscript and put together what we now recognize as the Adagio, heard hear in a piano arrangement by Henri Carol.

@231  No one knows where the title French Suites came from. Bach, who composed them in 1722, only called them "Suites pour le clavecin". Nevertheless, they are elegant sets of dances with a rich variety of melodic and rhythmic invention, certainly earning the reputation as Bach's best examples of genre. Suite No. 5 in G major is considered the finest of the six French Suites. The texture is mainly in two voices and have few technical difficulties. There are no Preludes, however, the standard dances — Allemande (grave and serious), Courante (lively), Sarabande (slow, lyrical and ornamented), and Gigue — are present. The Menuet from No. 3 in B minor is melodic and quite simple to play. 

@232  No one knows where the title French Suites came from. Bach, who composed them in 1722, only called them "Suites pour le clavecin". Nevertheless, they are elegant sets of dances with a rich variety of melodic and rhythmic invention, certainly earning the reputation as Bach's best examples of genre. Suite No. 5 in G major is considered the finest of the six French Suites. The texture is mainly in two voices and have few technical difficulties. There are no Preludes, however, the standard dances — Allemande (grave and serious), Courante (lively), Sarabande (slow, lyrical and ornamented), and Gigue — are present. No. 2 in C minor is the simplest of the six Suites. The texture is mainly two-voice and is similar in difficulty to the composer's two-part inventions.

@233  Chopin, as did many composers, used the dance form as a vehicle for self-expression. Chopin's choices were the Mazurka, Polonaise and the Waltz. He composed fourteen waltzes. In many ways, his treatment of the them is akin to the way Baroque composers treated court dances. The layout of the music is simple, the music elegant and charming. As with the Mazurkas, the early waltzes are closer to actual dances. Later, they become increasingly florid and intended for listening only. The famous Grande Valse Brillante in A-flat, Op. 34, No. 1 (composed in 1835) is one of the more difficult of the set. There is some delicate hand staccato in the opening section and eventually a powerful climax.

@234  Czech composer Bedrich Smetana (1824-1884) is best known for his orchestral works such as The Moldau and his opera The Bartered Bride, however, he was also fine pianist who took inspiration from Liszt (in fact, he played his first solo piano recital at age six). Smetana also looked to Chopin for ways to use his own countries folk music and dance in his compositions. The Slepicak and Polka for piano are two good examples.

@235  No one knows where the title French Suites came from. Bach, who composed them in 1722, only called them "Suites pour le clavecin". Nevertheless, they are elegant sets of dances with a rich variety of melodic and rhythmic invention, certainly earning the reputation as Bach's best examples of genre. Suite No. 5 in G major is considered the finest of the six French Suites. The texture is mainly in two voices and have few technical difficulties. There are no Preludes, however, the standard dances — Allemande (grave and serious), Courante (lively), Sarabande (slow, lyrical and ornamented), and Gigue — are present. This popular Gigue presents both rhythmic and technical challenges that are more difficult than anywhere else in this series.

@236  Czech composer Bedrich Smetana (1824-1884) is best known for his orchestral works such as The Moldau and his opera The Bartered Bride, however, he was also a fine pianist who took inspiration from Liszt (in fact, he played his first solo piano recital at age six). Smetana also looked to Chopin for ways to use his own countries folk music and dance in his compositions. The Slepicak and Polka for piano are two good examples.

@237  During Beethoven's career, the Menuet (or Minuet) was most commonly found as an "in-between" movement in Symphonies or Sonatas (although Beethoven later preferred the more robust Scherzo as a substitute). This harkened back to the Baroque Suite, where the Minuet was just one in a string of dance movements. Beethoven's little Menuet in G stands well on its own and has been a favorite over the years.

@238  In the music of Emmanuel Chabrier (1841-1894), one can find the germs of Impressionism. His music has sparkling vitality and fantasy infused with rhythmic energy. In addition, his fertile imagination created strange harmonic color effects.  His pieces use the straightforward A B A plan of the minuet or scherzo. The Scherzo-Valse (from Pièces pittoresques, 1880) is a boisterous, brilliantly effective work. After the music's premiere at a Société Nationale concert, composer César Franck wrote, "We have just heard something extraordinary. This music links our era with that of Couperin and Rameau". Scherzo-Valse, a brilliant staccato study, is a boisterous, effective work. 

@239  The Lieder ohne Worte (Songs without Words) continued Schubert's tradition of writing short, lyrical pieces for the piano. Melodic or lyric style is combined with harmonic, instrumental style. Felix Mendelssohn (1809-1847) wrote a total of 48 Songs without Words, published in sets of six. The first edition, published in London, had the title Original Melodies for the Pianoforte. The second edition appeared as Songs without Words. Most of the pieces have characteristic titles, but except for a few, were all added by editors and pianists (promotional gimmicks existed even in the 19th century). Although he never publicly protested the titles, his personal letters indicate that he never approved of these "poetic appendages". Rather than trying to capture the spirit of something specific, they are glimpses of more fundamental emotional and musical feelings. 

@240  Chopin's nineteen Nocturnes are his most introspective and genuinely subjective works. Irish composer John Field (1782-1837) may get the credit for inventing the piano Nocturne in the form of a lyrical, expressive melody supported by harmony, but it is Chopin who raised the form to its highest level. Most have a basic ternary (A B A) form, however, Chopin develops the basic melody with his own magical kind of ornamentation. Sometimes the melodies become very elaborate with cadenza-like flourishes, while undulating broken figures in the bass give support. The mood is generally meditative, in keeping with the title. The Nocturne in C minor, Op. 48, No. 1, is an exception. Although beginning calmly, it is a turbulent work. The middle section grows to an imposing climax, with massive chords and Lisztian octaves.

@241  Muzio Clementi (1752-1832), the celebrated Italian pianist and composer, not only left many published technical piano studies, but also a large amount of serious piano music. Beginning with his concert debut in London in 1770, he took Europe by storm, with concerts in London, Paris, Strasburg, Munich and Vienna. As a pianist, he even had a friendly rivalry with Mozart (the latter dismissing Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). Nevertheless, he may very well have established the "piano sonata" as we know it today. As a composer, he may not have swayed Mozart but at least had the admiration of Beethoven. His piano Sonatinas have musical appeal to not only adults but most young pianists, so there use for teaching material is understandable. The 106 Sonatas have not remained as popular, but their musicality and craftsmanship are admirable. His Sonata in F-sharp minor, Op. 25, No. 5 was composed in 1790. It has a remarkable seriousness and depth of feeling. The first movement Allegro con espressione unfolds elegantly, and without a hint of virtuoso superficiality.

@242  Muzio Clementi (1752-1832), the celebrated Italian pianist and composer, not only left many published technical piano studies, but also a large amount of serious piano music. Beginning with his concert debut in London in 1770, he took Europe by storm, with concerts in London, Paris, Strasburg, Munich and Vienna. As a pianist, he even had a friendly rivalry with Mozart (the latter dismissing Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). Nevertheless, he may very well have established the "piano sonata" as we know it today. As a composer, he may not have swayed Mozart but at least had the admiration of Beethoven. His piano Sonatinas have musical appeal to not only adults but most young pianists, so there use for teaching material is understandable. The 106 Sonatas have not remained as popular, but their musicality and craftsmanship are admirable. His Sonata in F-sharp minor, Op. 25, No. 5 was composed in 1790. It has a remarkable seriousness and depth of feeling. The second movement, Lento e patetico, begins with stately poise and gently becomes more intense and melodically ornate.

@243  Muzio Clementi (1752-1832), the celebrated Italian pianist and composer, not only left many published technical piano studies, but also a large amount of serious piano music. Beginning with his concert debut in London in 1770, he took Europe by storm, with concerts in London, Paris, Strasburg, Munich and Vienna. As a pianist, he even had a friendly rivalry with Mozart (the latter dismissing Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). Nevertheless, he may very well have established the "piano sonata" as we know it today. As a composer, he may not have swayed Mozart but at least had the admiration of Beethoven. His piano Sonatinas have musical appeal to not only adults but most young pianists, so there use for teaching material is understandable. The 106 Sonatas have not remained as popular, but their musicality and craftsmanship are admirable. His Sonata in F-sharp minor, Op. 25, No. 5 was composed in 1790. It has a remarkable seriousness and depth of feeling. The last movement, marked Presto, is of surprising length and depth. One of the technical challenges are long passages of melody in thirds.

@244  Italian pianist and composer Muzio Clementi (1752-1832) has sometimes been called the father of modern pianoforte playing. He certainly developed a reputation throughout Europe as one of the finest living pianists, even the equal of Mozart (although the latter dismissed Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). He did have the admiration of many composers, including Beethoven (who studied Clementi's Sonatas carefully). His musically appealing piano Sonatinas are still basic repertoire in the training of young pianists. The six Sonatinas, Op. 36, have become especially popular. No. 4 in F is heard often. Its opening movement, Con spirito, has a strength of purpose which makes it feel serious as well as vigorous.

@245  Italian pianist and composer Muzio Clementi (1752-1832) has sometimes been called the father of modern pianoforte playing. He certainly developed a reputation throughout Europe as one of the finest living pianists, even the equal of Mozart (although the latter dismissed Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). He did have the admiration of many composers, including Beethoven (who studied Clementi's Sonatas carefully). His musically appealing piano Sonatinas are still basic repertoire in the training of young pianists. The six Sonatinas, Op. 36, have become especially popular. The slow movement of No. 4 in F, Andante con espressione, has real substance and emotional depth.

@246  Italian pianist and composer Muzio Clementi (1752-1832) has sometimes been called the father of modern pianoforte playing. He certainly developed a reputation throughout Europe as one of the finest living pianists, even the equal of Mozart (although the latter dismissed Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). He did have the admiration of many composers, including Beethoven (who studied Clementi's Sonatas carefully). His musically appealing piano Sonatinas are still basic repertoire in the training of young pianists. The six Sonatinas, Op. 36, have become especially popular. The final Rondo movement of No. 4 in F, marked Allegro vivace, has a delightful triplet rhythm which gives it wonderful lightness and unwavering energy.

@247  Italian pianist and composer Muzio Clementi (1752-1832) has sometimes been called the father of modern pianoforte playing. He certainly developed a reputation throughout Europe as one of the finest living pianists, even the equal of Mozart (although the latter dismissed Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). He did have the admiration of many composers, including Beethoven (who studied Clementi's Sonatas carefully). His musically appealing piano Sonatinas are still basic repertoire in the training of young pianists. The six Sonatinas, Op. 36, have become especially popular. No. 3 in C has a first movement marked Spiritoso. Indeed, it is happily rhythmic and sparkles with staccatos and flashes of sixteenth notes.

@248  Italian pianist and composer Muzio Clementi (1752-1832) has sometimes been called the father of modern pianoforte playing. He certainly developed a reputation throughout Europe as one of the finest living pianists, even the equal of Mozart (although the latter dismissed Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). He did have the admiration of many composers, including Beethoven (who studied Clementi's Sonatas carefully). His musically appealing piano Sonatinas are still basic repertoire in the training of young pianists. The six Sonatinas, Op. 36, have become especially popular. The slow movement of No. 3 in C, marked Un poco adagio, is very short (a mere 16 bars — 32 bars if you count the repeats).

@249  Italian pianist and composer Muzio Clementi (1752-1832) has sometimes been called the father of modern pianoforte playing. He certainly developed a reputation throughout Europe as one of the finest living pianists, even the equal of Mozart (although the latter dismissed Clementi as a technician and an inferior composer). He did have the admiration of many composers, including Beethoven (who studied Clementi's Sonatas carefully). His musically appealing piano Sonatinas are still basic repertoire in the training of young pianists. The six Sonatinas, Op. 36, have become especially popular. The third movement of No. 3 in C, marked Allegro, picks up on the contrast between staccatos and running sixteenth notes of the first movement. It's many little musical surprises are both amusing and enjoyable.

@250  English composer John Ireland's (1879-1962) The Island Spell was composed at Fauvic on the Isle of Jersey in 1912. A poem by Arthur Symons was attached to the music: "I would wash the dust of the world in a soft green flood: Here, between sea and sea, in the fairy wood, I have found a delicate, wave-green solitude..." Ireland's short piano pieces all have distinctive titles that appeal to the imagination. In The Island Spell, a bell-like motive, in detached notes with accompanying figures divided between the hands, is the main musical material. A loud carillon effect in the middle dies away in a delicate pianissimo.

@251  Franz Liszt wrote many transcriptions or arrangements for piano based on orchestral, instrumental and vocal works. This included a number of fantasies based on popular operas of his time. Many are dazzling feats of virtuosity. The main reason that they are rarely heard today is that they are so technically difficult. Renowned composer of opera and memorable melody, Rossini composed his Soirées musicales 1830-5. This is Liszt's spectacular arrangement of No. 8 from the set: La Danza - Tarantella Napolitana.

@252  Chopin's twelve Etudes, Op. 10, were composed between 1829-32, and first published in 1833. The twelve Etudes of Opus 25 were composed from 1832-6. Within these works are the essence of the composer's distinctive traits, including fluidity of harmony, richness of melodic invention and a highly personal, inner vitality. As one would expect from the title, each "etude" exploits one particular problem of pianism. However, Chopin's technical problems do not outweigh the sheer musicality and artistry of this works. The Etude No.8 in F, Op. 10, features brilliant finger passages that sweep up and down over four octaves in the right hand while the melody appears in the left hand. It is a great virtuoso piece!

@253  Chopin's twelve Etudes, Op. 10, were composed between 1829-32, and first published in 1833. The twelve Etudes of Opus 25 were composed from 1832-6. Within these works are the essence of the composer's distinctive traits, including fluidity of harmony, richness of melodic invention and a highly personal, inner vitality. As one would expect from the title, each "etude" exploits one particular problem of pianism. However, Chopin's technical problems do not outweigh the sheer musicality and artistry of this works. The Etude No. 7 in C, Op. 10, challenges the pianist to play a smooth melody with the outer fingers of the right hand while at the same time playing alternate thumb and second finger in the same chord. It is good work out for all the fingers.

@254  Chopin's twelve Etudes, Op. 10, were composed between 1829-32, and first published in 1833. The twelve Etudes of Opus 25 were composed from 1832-6. Within these works are the essence of the composer's distinctive traits, including fluidity of harmony, richness of melodic invention and a highly personal, inner vitality. As one would expect from the title, each "etude" exploits one particular problem of pianism. However, Chopin's technical problems do not outweigh the sheer musicality and artistry of this works. The Etude No.9 in F minor, Op. 10, is dominated by the rolling left hand accompaniment as a melancholic melody appears in the right hand.

@255  J.S. Bach (1685-1750) originally composed the fifteen Two-part Inventions and fifteen Sinfonias (or Three-part Inventions)  for his son Wilhelm Friedemann. In what was called the Clavierbüchlein (Little Keyboard Book), the Inventions were listed as Preambles and Fantasias. Bach revised them in 1723 and they were then titled Inventions and Sinfonias (Inventionen und Sinfonien). His introduction reads: "Upright instructions wherein the lovers of the clavier, and especially those desirous of learning, are shown a clear way not alone (1) to learn to play clearly in two voices, but also, after further progress, (2) to deal correctly and well with three obbligato parts; furthermore, at the same time not alone to have good inventions, but to develop the same well, and above all to arrive at a singing style in playing and at the same time to acquire a strong foretaste of composition." They are mainly in simple song form (A B A) with each hand carrying a melody.

@256  J.S. Bach (1685-1750) originally composed the fifteen Two-part Inventions and fifteen Sinfonias (or Three-part Inventions)  for his son Wilhelm Friedemann. In what was called the Clavierbüchlein (Little Keyboard Book), the Inventions were listed as Preambles and Fantasias. Bach revised them in 1723 and they were then titled Inventions and Sinfonias (Inventionen und Sinfonien). His introduction reads: "Upright instructions wherein the lovers of the clavier, and especially those desirous of learning, are shown a clear way not alone (1) to learn to play clearly in two voices, but also, after further progress, (2) to deal correctly and well with three obbligato parts; furthermore, at the same time not alone to have good inventions, but to develop the same well, and above all to arrive at a singing style in playing and at the same time to acquire a strong foretaste of composition." They are mainly in simple song form (A B A) with each hand carrying a melody. The three-part inventions are similar in form to the two-part inventions.

@257  The Lieder ohne Worte (Songs without Words) continued Schubert's tradition of writing short, lyrical pieces for the piano. Melodic or lyric style is combined with harmonic, instrumental style. Felix Mendelssohn (1809-1847) wrote a total of 48 Songs without Words, published in sets of six. The first edition, published in London, had the title Original Melodies for the Pianoforte. The second edition appeared as Songs without Words. Most of the pieces have characteristic titles, but except for a few, were all added by editors and pianists (promotional gimmicks existed even in the 19th century). Although he never publicly protested the titles, his personal letters indicate that he never approved of these "poetic appendages". Rather than trying to capture the spirit of something specific, they are glimpses of more fundamental emotional and musical feelings. Opus 38 was published in 1837. 

@258  The Lieder ohne Worte (Songs without Words) continued Schubert's tradition of writing short, lyrical pieces for the piano. Melodic or lyric style is combined with harmonic, instrumental style. Felix Mendelssohn (1809-1847) wrote a total of 48 Songs without Words, published in sets of six. The first edition, published in London, had the title Original Melodies for the Pianoforte. The second edition appeared as Songs without Words. Most of the pieces have characteristic titles, but except for a few, were all added by editors and pianists (promotional gimmicks existed even in the 19th century). Although he never publicly protested the titles, his personal letters indicate that he never approved of these "poetic appendages". Rather than trying to capture the spirit of something specific, they are glimpses of more fundamental emotional and musical feelings. Opus 53 was published in 1841.

@259  The Lieder ohne Worte (Songs without Words) continued Schubert's tradition of writing short, lyrical pieces for the piano. Melodic or lyric style is combined with harmonic, instrumental style. Felix Mendelssohn (1809-1847) wrote a total of 48 Songs without Words, published in sets of six. The first edition, published in London, had the title Original Melodies for the Pianoforte. The second edition appeared as Songs without Words. Most of the pieces have characteristic titles, but except for a few, were all added by editors and pianists (promotional gimmicks existed even in the 19th century). Although he never publicly protested the titles, his personal letters indicate that he never approved of these "poetic appendages". Rather than trying to capture the spirit of something specific, they are glimpses of more fundamental emotional and musical feelings. Opus 30 was the second book, published in 1835 as Six Romances. This "Venetian Boat Song" completes the set.

@260  General Lavine, eccentric is from Debussy's second book of Preludes (1913). It has rhythmic incisiveness and good humor. There are no serious technical difficulties for the performer. Like Chopin, Debussy composed twenty-four Preludes (twelve in each of two books).

@261  Arthur Benjamin (1893-1960) was an Australian composer and pianist. His popular Jamaican Rhumba is a light dance piece published in 1938, also written for piano duo and arranged for many other combinations including small orchestra.

@262  Béla Bartok (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century. He showed a younger generation that new expressive means were still possible within traditional confines; musical ideas could be reshaped and restated in countless ways; that the use of folk elements in music can be energizing; and that rhythmic transformations can be accomplished by infinite variation. Starting with traditional Hungarian folk  music, he developed a new musical language. Yet while creating large works for virtuoso piano, he also wrote many short pieces for children, including these simple Folk Tunes.

@263  Béla Bartok (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century. He showed a younger generation that new expressive means were still possible within traditional confines; musical ideas could be reshaped and restated in countless ways; that the use of folk elements in music can be energizing; and that rhythmic transformations can be accomplished by infinite variation. Starting with traditional Hungarian folk  music, he developed a new musical language. Yet while creating large works for virtuoso piano, he also wrote many short pieces for children, including these simple Folk Tunes.

@264  Béla Bartok (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century. He showed a younger generation that new expressive means were still possible within traditional confines; musical ideas could be reshaped and restated in countless ways; that the use of folk elements in music can be energizing; and that rhythmic transformations can be accomplished by infinite variation. Starting with traditional Hungarian folk  music, he developed a new musical language. Yet while creating large works for virtuoso piano, he also wrote many short pieces for children, including these simple Folk Tunes.

@265  Béla Bartok (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century. He showed a younger generation that new expressive means were still possible within traditional confines; musical ideas could be reshaped and restated in countless ways; that the use of folk elements in music can be energizing; and that rhythmic transformations can be accomplished by infinite variation. Starting with traditional Hungarian folk  music, he developed a new musical language. Yet while creating large works for virtuoso piano, he also wrote many short pieces for children, including these simple Folk Tunes.

@266  Of recent Russian composers, Reinhold Glière (1875-1956) was one of the most eminent and prolific. Although he never went beyond traditional harmony, and thus remained socially "respectable", Glière achieved impressive results in many types of music. He also wrote simple salon music with touches of folk flavor and easy charm which could not offend any political ears. His Romance falls comfortably in that category.

@267  Spanish composer Enrique Granados (1867-1916) is known for his elegant and poetic piano works. He is most famous for his Goyescas Suite (part of which - The Lady and the Nightingale - is in The Pianist). He also composed seven Valse Poeticos, including this lovely selection.

@268  Dmitri Shostakovich (1906-1975) was a composer who managed to be creative and successful while still considered "politically correct" within his native Russia. He did not write any serious large-scale works for piano solo aside from his two sonatas. His major contribution to the piano literature is his Twenty-Four Preludes & Fugues, Opus 87, which was completed in 1951. The Three Fantastic Dances, Opus 5, is an early student work composed in 1922. It is easy to play and often learned by piano students.

@269  Dmitri Shostakovich (1906-1975) was a composer who managed to be creative and successful while still considered "politically correct" within his native Russia. He did not write any serious large-scale works for piano solo aside from his two sonatas. His major contribution to the piano literature is his Twenty-Four Preludes & Fugues, Opus 87, which was completed in 1951. The Three Fantastic Dances, Opus 5, is an early student work composed in 1922. It is easy to play and often learned by piano students.

@270  Dmitri Shostakovich (1906-1975) was a composer who managed to be creative and successful while still considered "politically correct" within his native Russia. He did not write any serious large-scale works for piano solo aside from his two sonatas. His major contribution to the piano literature is his Twenty-Four Preludes & Fugues, Opus 87, which was completed in 1951. The Three Fantastic Dances, Opus 5, is an early student work composed in 1922. It is easy to play and often learned by piano students.

@271  Schubert composed many sets of short dances, such as waltzes, ländlers and ecossaises, that are technically and musically unchallenging but have a childlike charm, and sometimes surprising subtlety. Schubert loved to spend many hours at home, playing these pieces on the piano as his friends danced. The Ländler was type of slow waltz that originated in the Landel (in Austria, north of the Ems river).

@272  Which concert pianist became Prime Minister of his own country? The answer: Ignancy Jan Paderewski (1860-1941). His stint as PM of Poland only lasted a year, but his legacy as a pianist and composer lives on, especially through his work in supervising the creation of a complete and definitive edition of Chopin's works. His little Minuet in G, Op. 14, No. 1, is an easy and attractive salon piece, admirably suited to the piano, and eternally popular.

@273  Some of Edvard Grieg's (1843-1907) most characteristic work is to be found in the series of volumes entitled "Lyric Pieces". These short compositions have a strong national flavor and are influenced by the folk music of Norway. They are, almost without exception, technically simple and quite elementary in structure, with some similarity to Schumann's smaller pieces. Opus 12 was Grieg's first set of Lyric Pieces, composed in 1867 and containing eight contrasting works. Album Leaf, which shows traces of Chopin's style, has a simple right hand melody, with alternating cantabile for the left hand.

@274  Schubert composed many sets of short dances, such as waltzes, ländlers and ecossaises, that are technically and musically unchallenging but have a childlike charm, and sometimes surprising subtlety. Schubert loved to spend many hours at home, playing these pieces on the piano as his friends danced. The Ecossaise is a two-step type of country dance. No one knows the reason for the name, since there is nothing obviously "Scottish" about the music's character.

@275  Alexander Scriabin (1872-1915) began to compose his fourth Sonata in 1899 and finished it in 1903. Like the first three sonatas, the influences of Chopin and Liszt are still apparent. Scriabin has not yet found the highly individual style that he would find in Sonatas 5 to 10. In this short Sonata, several movements are merged into one. The delicate, atmospheric Andante continues into the Prestissimo without a break. The music reaches a grand climax. The rich textures and powerful expression makes this work immediately attractive.

@276  Harriet Cohen (1895-1967) was a renowned English pianist who not only championed early keyboard music but also her contemporary English composers, including Vaughan Williams (who composed his Concertante for Orchestra & Piano, left hand only, for Cohen after she had injured her right hand). Our pianist Valerie Tryon won the Hariett Cohen award as a youth in England and remembers being given the prize by Cohen herself. The Bach chorale Liebster Jesu, wir sind hier was arranged for piano by  Cohen.

@277  Alexander Scriabin (1872-1915) has been described as the "least Russian of all the native composers". His models were Liszt and Chopin, and later Wagner. There is no evidence of native folk melody in his music. The 85 Preludes  follow directly in the footsteps of Chopin. Like Chopin, Scriabin was himself a pianist and his music shows an intimate understanding of the instrument and its possibilities. They are outstanding works that demand bravura, sensitivity, and careful balancing of piano sonorities.

@278  Alexander Scriabin (1872-1915) has been described as the "least Russian of all the native composers". His models were Liszt and Chopin, and later Wagner. There is no evidence of native folk melody in his music. The 85 Preludes  follow directly in the footsteps of Chopin. Like Chopin, Scriabin was himself a pianist and his music shows an intimate understanding of the instrument and its possibilities. They are outstanding works that demand bravura, sensitivity, and careful balancing of piano sonorities.

@279  Alexander Scriabin (1872-1915) has been described as the "least Russian of all the native composers". His models were Liszt and Chopin, and later Wagner. There is no evidence of native folk melody in his music. The 85 Preludes  follow directly in the footsteps of Chopin. Like Chopin, Scriabin was himself a pianist and his music shows an intimate understanding of the instrument and its possibilities. They are outstanding works that demand bravura, sensitivity, and careful balancing of piano sonorities.

@280  It is curious that Erik Satie (1866-1925), a composer who on the surface appeared so casual about his own work, has been remembered. He was a friend of such greats as Debussy, Picasso and Cocteau. Yet his own music might more be described as eccentric and intellectually witty. Today, Satie is almost universally known for his three simple but haunting Gymnopedie for piano (but arranged for just about everything else). His 3 Gnossiènnes (1890) are very similar in scale, but with a more exotic, modern flavor. The notation is barless and without time signatures. The music is spiced with satiric fragments that don't seem to be related to the music (a common trait in Satie's style). It is thought that "Gnossiènne"  refers to the palace of Knossos in Crete. No. 1 is marked Lent.

@281  It is curious that Erik Satie (1866-1925), a composer who on the surface appeared so casual about his own work, has been remembered. He was a friend of such greats as Debussy, Picasso and Cocteau. Yet his own music might more be described as eccentric and intellectually witty. Today, Satie is almost universally known for his three simple but haunting Gymnopedie for piano (but arranged for just about everything else). His 3 Gnossiènnes (1890) are very similar in scale, but with a more exotic, modern flavor. The notation is barless and without time signatures. The music is spiced with satiric fragments that don't seem to be related to the music (a common trait in Satie's style). It is thought that "Gnossiènne"  refers to the palace of Knossos in Crete. No. 2 is marked With Astonishment.

@282  It is curious that Erik Satie (1866-1925), a composer who on the surface appeared so casual about his own work, has been remembered. He was a friend of such greats as Debussy, Picasso and Cocteau. Yet his own music might more be described as eccentric and intellectually witty. Today, Satie is almost universally known for his three simple but haunting Gymnopedie for piano (but arranged for just about everything else). His 3 Gnossiènnes (1890) are very similar in scale, but with a more exotic, modern flavor. The notation is barless and without time signatures. The music is spiced with satiric fragments that don't seem to be related to the music (a common trait in Satie's style). It is thought that "Gnossiènne"  refers to the palace of Knossos in Crete. No. 3 is marked Lent.

@283  From Ernst von Dohnányi's (1877-1960) Six Concert Etudes, Opus 28, this popular Capriccio is a fireworks display which  is dazzling  when its technical difficulties have been conquered. Dohnányi, who was influenced by Brahms,  produced many compositions distinguished by exceptional command of traditional 19th century techniques and idiom. He does have, however, an individual quality, and the feeling for the piano one expects from a composer who was also an internationally-renowned concert pianist.

@284  Chopin's twelve Etudes, Op. 10, were composed between 1829-32, and first published in 1833. The twelve Etudes of Opus 25 were composed from 1832-6. Within these works are the essence of the composer's distinctive traits, including fluidity of harmony, richness of melodic invention and a highly personal, inner vitality. As one would expect from the title, each "etude" exploits one particular problem of pianism. However, Chopin's technical problems do not outweigh the sheer musicality and artistry of this works. The Etude No. 1 in C, Op. 10, is a roller coaster of unending brilliant arpeggios in the right hand. The effect is one of towering strength and joyous energy.

@285  Béla Bartók (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century, demonstrating how traditional folk music elements could be integrated and transformed with modern techniques. His style is economical and filled with rhythmic vitality. This is seen especially is later works for orchestra, but also in such large scale works for the piano such as his Allegro Barbaro and his Piano Sonata. He also wrote many short settings of Hungarian and Slovakian melodies and folk dances for children. Composed in 1915, Bartók's Rumanian Folk Dances are made up of six short pieces based on peasant folk melodies in their simplest form. The exotic sounding modal melodies and the rhythmic vitality have made them one of Bartók's most popular works. In 1917, Bartók arranged them for salon orchestra, and later for violin and piano. Dance No. 1 is called Jocul cu bâta (Stick Dance) and is moderately paced.

@286    Béla Bartók (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century, demonstrating how traditional folk music elements could be integrated and transformed with modern techniques. His style is economical and filled with rhythmic vitality. This is seen especially is later works for orchestra, but also in such large scale works for the piano such as his Allegro Barbaro and his Piano Sonata. He also wrote many short settings of Hungarian and Slovakian melodies and folk dances for children. Composed in 1915, Bartók's Rumanian Folk Dances are made up of six short pieces based on peasant folk melodies in their simplest form. The exotic sounding modal melodies and the rhythmic vitality have made them one of Bartók's most popular works. In 1917, Bartok arranged them for salon orchestra, and later for violin and piano. Dance No. 2 is called Brâul (Sash or Waistband Dance) and is fast.

@287    Béla Bartók (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century, demonstrating how traditional folk music elements could be integrated and transformed with modern techniques. His style is economical and filled with rhythmic vitality. This is seen especially is later works for orchestra, but also in such large scale works for the piano such as his Allegro Barbaro and his Piano Sonata. He also wrote many short settings of Hungarian and Slovakian melodies and folk dances for children. Composed in 1915, Bartók's Rumanian Folk Dances are made up of six short pieces based on peasant folk melodies in their simplest form. The exotic sounding modal melodies and the rhythmic vitality have made them one of Bartók's most popular works. In 1917, Bartok arranged them for salon orchestra, and later for violin and piano. No. 3 is Pe loc (Stamping Dance) and is moderately fast.

@288    Béla Bartók (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century, demonstrating how traditional folk music elements could be integrated and transformed with modern techniques. His style is economical and filled with rhythmic vitality. This is seen especially is later works for orchestra, but also in such large scale works for the piano such as his Allegro Barbaro and his Piano Sonata. He also wrote many short settings of Hungarian and Slovakian melodies and folk dances for children. Composed in 1915, Bartók's Rumanian Folk Dances are made up of six short pieces based on peasant folk melodies in their simplest form. The exotic sounding modal melodies and the rhythmic vitality have made them one of Bartók's most popular works. In 1917, Bartok arranged them for salon orchestra, and later for violin and piano. No. 4 is Buciumeana (Hornpipe - or Bucium — Dance) and is marked Andante.

@289    Béla Bartók (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century, demonstrating how traditional folk music elements could be integrated and transformed with modern techniques. His style is economical and filled with rhythmic vitality. This is seen especially is later works for orchestra, but also in such large scale works for the piano such as his Allegro Barbaro and his Piano Sonata. He also wrote many short settings of Hungarian and Slovakian melodies and folk dances for children. Composed in 1915, Bartók's Rumanian Folk Dances are made up of six short pieces based on peasant folk melodies in their simplest form. The exotic sounding modal melodies and the rhythmic vitality have made them one of Bartók's most popular works. In 1917, Bartok arranged them for salon orchestra, and later for violin and piano. No. 5 is Poarga româneascâ (Romanian Polka) and is fast.

@290    Béla Bartók (1881-1945) was one of the most influential composers of the twentieth century, demonstrating how traditional folk music elements could be integrated and transformed with modern techniques. His style is economical and filled with rhythmic vitality. This is seen especially is later works for orchestra, but also in such large scale works for the piano such as his Allegro Barbaro and his Piano Sonata. He also wrote many short settings of Hungarian and Slovakian melodies and folk dances for children. Composed in 1915, Bartók's Rumanian Folk Dances are made up of six short pieces based on peasant folk melodies in their simplest form. The exotic sounding modal melodies and the rhythmic vitality have made them one of Bartók's most popular works. In 1917, Bartok arranged them for salon orchestra, and later for violin and piano. No. 6 is Mâruntel (Fast Dance).

@291  Some of Edvard Grieg's (1843-1907) most characteristic work is to be found in the series of volumes entitled "Lyric Pieces". These short compositions have a strong national flavor and are influenced by the folk music of Norway. They are, almost without exception, technically simple and quite elementary in structure, with some similarity to Schumann's smaller pieces. Opus 71 appeared in 1901 and are Grieg's last set of Lyric Pieces. No. 7 (Remembrances) is a gentle waltz with a melancholic melody.

@292  French composer Jacques Ibert (1890-1962) was a fine craftsman who used established techniques to create colorful music often laced with an element of humor. Le petit âne blanc (The Little White Donkey) is one of his most popular works. It is a humorous selection from his piano suite Histoires, made up of ten light, descriptive pieces.

@293  Chopin's Trois Ecossaise, Op. 72 (in D, G & D-flat), are pleasant musical trifles, and very easy to play. They were composed in 1830 and published after the composer's death.

@294  Chopin's Trois Ecossaise, Op. 72 (in D, G & D-flat), are pleasant musical trifles, and very easy to play. They were composed in 1830 and published after the composer's death.

@295  Chopin's Trois Ecossaise, Op. 72 (in D, G & D-flat), are pleasant musical trifles, and very easy to play. They were composed in 1830 and published after the composer's death.

@296  Enrique Granados (1867-1916) has been labeled one of the least Spanish of Spanish composers. Nevertheless, he was an outstanding pianist and his compositions for keyboard have Chopinesque beauty and style. Goyescas, subtitled Los Majos Enamorados (the Majas in love), appeared in 1911 and consists of six pieces inspired by the paintings and etchings of Goya. Granados later used the music from this suite for an opera, Goyescas, which premiered at New York's Metropolitan Opera House in 1916 with great success. No. 4 is Quejos ó la Maja y el Ruisenor (The Lady and the Nightingale). The magnificent lyricism, Spanish feel and perfect construction has made it the most popular of the set.

@297  'Tis the Last Rose of Summer is an Old Irish air, originally called Castle Hyde. In 1790, R.A. Millikin presented the tune as The Groves of Blarney, and it was included by Thomas Moore (with his own new words) in his Irish Melodies (1813). The melody had staying power. Beethoven had composed a setting of the tune. Mendelssohn outdid him with this Fantasy.

@298  The eminent English composer John Ireland (1879-1962) wrote his London Pieces between 1917-20. They are three striking pictures of life in the great city. Ragamuffin is the second in the set, which includes Chelsea Reach and Soho Forenoons. It is straightforward both technically and musically, and features a rollicking rhythmic melody. "Ragamuffin" is London slang for a poor  Cockney boy.

@299  The piano music of Alexander Scriabin (1872-1915) has its roots in Chopin. Like Chopin, his early works include such forms as Nocturnes, Preludes and Etudes. Harmonically, he follows the tradition of Liszt and Wagner, developing a highly chromatic style. His Etudes are in a special category. Here Scriabin  explored what were then new aspects of pianism, such as an increased piano sonorities and sure grasp of polyrhythms. Technically, Scriabin's piano music sees the pedal binding sonorities over a wide keyboard range, widely spaced figuration, flexible irregular rhythmic groupings, large-scale octave and chord passages, the use of trills for coloristic effect. The twelve Etudes of Opus 8 were composed in 1894. No. 1 in C-sharp is passionate with a continuous roar of triplet chords woven with inner melodies.

@300  The piano music of Alexander Scriabin (1872-1915) has its roots in Chopin. Like Chopin, his early works include such forms as Nocturnes, Preludes and Etudes. Harmonically, he follows the tradition of Liszt and Wagner, developing a highly chromatic style. His Etudes are in a special category. Here Scriabin  explored what were then new aspects of pianism, such as an increased piano sonorities and sure grasp of polyrhythms. Technically, Scriabin's piano music sees the pedal binding sonorities over a wide keyboard range, widely spaced figuration, flexible irregular rhythmic groupings, large-scale octave and chord passages, the use of trills for coloristic effect. The twelve Etudes of Opus 8 were composed in 1894. No. 11 in B-flat minor is sombre in mood. In the originally manuscript, there was no tempo indication. Scriabin merely wrote Cantabile (or in a singing style). He later added Andante.

@301  The piano music of Alexander Scriabin (1872-1915) has its roots in Chopin. Like Chopin, his early works include such forms as Nocturnes, Preludes and Etudes. Harmonically, he follows the tradition of Liszt and Wagner, developing a highly chromatic style.  The slow Prelude in C-sharp minor, Op. 9, No. 1 (composed in 1894) is for the left hand alone.

@302  Moritz Rosenthal (1862-1946) wrote this virtuoso Studie based on Chopin's popular Minute Waltz. Rosenthal was a Polish pianist and student of the great Franz Liszt. He went on to build an international reputation as a concert performer.

@303  What is often used by countless church organists as the Wedding March is actually The Bridal Chorus from the third act of Wagner's opera Lohengrin (composed 1845-8). The first production was conducted by pianist/composer/conductor Franz Liszt in 1850. It was said that the extraordinary Liszt was capable of taking a freshly composed orchestral score and perform it at first sight on the piano, complete with all the required musical expression! In front of his composing desk, he took the time to write many arrangements of his favorite orchestral works, mainly to perform in his own recitals but also to feed the market for musical transcriptions to play at home. Although you get to hear a lot of Wagner's opera beforehand, Liszt's arrangement of the Festspiel und Brautlied (from Lohengrin) includes The Bridal Chorus.

@304  In 1889, a young Claude Debussy (1862-1918) heard the Javanese gamelan, a type of Asian orchestra noted for its range of percussion instruments (gongs, drums, chimes, marimbas, etc.) at the 1889 Paris Exposition. The sounds were permanently etched into the composer's imagination, with the exoticism finding its way into a variety of works including Pagodes (Pagodas) from his 1903 trio of piano pieces called Estampes (Engravings). Debussy uses the pentatonic scale and pedal effects to paint a  picture of an Oriental temple with the clanging of bells and gongs. is suggested, using the pentatonic scale and washes of pedal.

@305  Without offering any technical novelty, the numerous pieces of Czech composer Antonin Dvorak (1841-1904) have much of the individual flavor of his large orchestral works. Most of them are no longer published, but No. 7 in G-flat from his eight Humoresques has become one of the most popular salon pieces of all time, and the sheet music is still readily available.

@306  Déodat de Sévérac (1873-1921) spent many of his early years in southern France and his music reflects the color of the area. He composed several collections of short piano pieces including Le chant de la terre, Poeme des montagnes and En Vacances. They are mainly descriptive pieces in a casual style. En Vacances consists of two collections (seven and three pieces respectively) of short romantic pieces of medium difficulty of which An Old Musical Box is No. 6.

@307  Chopin, as did many composers, used the dance form as a vehicle for self-expression. Chopin's choices were the Mazurka, Polonaise and the Waltz. He composed fourteen waltzes. In many ways, his treatment of the them is akin to the way Baroque composers treated court dances. The layout of the music is simple, the music elegant and charming. As with the Mazurkas, the early waltzes are closer to actual dances. Later, they become increasingly florid and intended for listening only. The Waltz in A minor, Op. 34, No. 2 (composed in 1831) has great charm. It is slow and easy to play.

@308  Chopin, as did many composers, used the dance form as a vehicle for self-expression. Chopin's choices were the Mazurka, Polonaise and the Waltz. He composed fourteen waltzes. In many ways, his treatment of the them is akin to the way Baroque composers treated court dances. The layout of the music is simple, the music elegant and charming. As with the Mazurkas, the early waltzes are closer to actual dances. Later, they become increasingly florid and intended for listening only. The Waltz in A-flat, Op. 70, No. 2 (composed in 1841) is quiet and expressive. It is not difficult to play.

@309  Chopin, as did many composers, used the dance form as a vehicle for self-expression. Chopin's choices were the Mazurka, Polonaise and the Waltz. He composed fourteen waltzes. In many ways, his treatment of the them is akin to the way Baroque composers treated court dances. The layout of the music is simple, the music elegant and charming. As with the Mazurkas, the early waltzes are closer to actual dances. Later, they become increasingly florid and intended for listening only. The Waltz in A-flat, Op. 64, No. 3 (composed 1846-7) is one of the most distinctive of the set. There are the subtleties of Chopin at his maturity. Syncopations of the main melody, unconventional rhythmic organization and the bold modulations provide unusual interest.

@310  Chopin, as did many composers, used the dance form as a vehicle for self-expression. Chopin's choices were the Mazurka, Polonaise and the Waltz. He composed fourteen waltzes. In many ways, his treatment of the them is akin to the way Baroque composers treated court dances. The layout of the music is simple, the music elegant and charming. As with the Mazurkas, the early waltzes are closer to actual dances. Later, they become increasingly florid and intended for listening only. The Waltz in B minor, Op. 69, No. 2 (composed in 1829) is  graceful and has a gentle expressiveness.

@311  Some of Edvard Grieg's (1843-1907) most characteristic work is to be found in the series of volumes entitled "Lyric Pieces". These short compositions have a strong national flavor and are influenced by the folk music of Norway. They are, almost without exception, technically simple and quite elementary in structure, with some similarity to Schumann's smaller pieces. The Waltz in A minor has simple staccato passages, single notes and chords. Opus 12 was Grieg's first set of Lyric Pieces, composed in 1867 and containing eight contrasting works.

@312  Chopin's nineteen Nocturnes are his most introspective and genuinely subjective works. Irish composer John Field (1782-1837) may get the credit for inventing the piano Nocturne in the form of a lyrical, expressive melody supported by harmony, but it is Chopin who raised the form to its highest level. Most have a basic ternary (A B A) form, however, Chopin develops the basic melody with his own magical kind of ornamentation. Sometimes the melodies become very elaborate with cadenza-like flourishes, while undulating broken figures in the bass give support. The mood is generally meditative, in keeping with the title. The Nocturne in F minor, Op. 55, No. 1, is easy to play, although their are some difficulties in the cadenza-like Coda.

@313  Chopin's nineteen Nocturnes are his most introspective and genuinely subjective works. Irish composer John Field (1782-1837) may get the credit for inventing the piano Nocturne in the form of a lyrical, expressive melody supported by harmony, but it is Chopin who raised the form to its highest level. Most have a basic ternary (A B A) form, however, Chopin develops the basic melody with his own magical kind of ornamentation. Sometimes the melodies become very elaborate with cadenza-like flourishes, while undulating broken figures in the bass give support. The mood is generally meditative, in keeping with the title. The Nocturne in E minor, Op. 72, No. 1, was published posthumously. It is a simple work, both structurally and technically, with a gently sustained melody which reaches a climax with a passionate, ornamented variation of the main theme.

@314  Chopin's nineteen Nocturnes are his most introspective and genuinely subjective works. Irish composer John Field (1782-1837) may get the credit for inventing the piano Nocturne in the form of a lyrical, expressive melody supported by harmony, but it is Chopin who raised the form to its highest level. Most have a basic ternary (A B A) form, however, Chopin develops the basic melody with his own magical kind of ornamentation. Sometimes the melodies become very elaborate with cadenza-like flourishes, while undulating broken figures in the bass give support. The mood is generally meditative, in keeping with the title.  In the popular Nocturne, Op. 37, No. 2, the Venetian melody, alternating with progressions in thirds and sixths, have wonderful effect. 
@315  Anton Rubinstein (1829-1894) was one of the greatest pianists of his time, quite capable of  challenging the performing prowess of Franz Liszt.  Like Liszt, he yearned to be known as a serious composer. He wrote over two hundred pieces for piano, performing them in his own recitals. It appeared that audiences came to hear his pianism, rather than his compositions. They have generally been forgotten, although their characteristic sentimentality and suave melody can been found in attractive little pieces such as the Romance in E-flat and his Melodies, Op. 3.

@316  Franz Schubert's six Moments Musicals, Opus 94, were first published in 1828. While Schubert found his strength in the creation of songs for voice and piano, he admittedly had trouble composing large-scale piano works. The short, almost improvisatory nature of character pieces such the Moments Musicals and his Impromptus was a perfect vehicle for his musical expression. No. 3 in F minor is a sprightly, miniature march, and is the most popular of the set. It was originally a separate work called Air Russe.


@
