@317  Prokofiev's Visions Fugitives, Op. 22, consists of twenty short pieces (composed 1915-17). These fleeting, poetic musical sketches are mainly lyrical with contrasting movements interspersed. They call for a variety of sound and imaginative playing. No. 1 is marked Lentamente and is both delicate and mysteriously expressive.

@318  Prokofiev's Visions Fugitives, Op. 22, consists of twenty short pieces. These fleeting, poetic musical sketches are mainly lyrical with contrasting movements interspersed. They call for a variety of sound and imaginative playing. No. 2, marked Andante, has a somewhat whimsical mood.

@319  Prokofiev's Visions Fugitives, Op. 22, consists of twenty short pieces. These fleeting, poetic musical sketches are mainly lyrical with contrasting movements interspersed. They call for a variety of sound and imaginative playing. No. 7, marked Pittoresco, is the only one of the set with a subtitle - "Harp". Arpeggiated chords and quick, glissando-like runs capture the feeling of a harp.

@320  Prokofiev's Visions Fugitives, Op. 22, consists of twenty short pieces. These fleeting, poetic musical sketches are mainly lyrical with contrasting movements interspersed. They call for a variety of sound and imaginative playing. No. 8 is marked Commodo to indicate the leisurely pace with which this relative long vision unfolds.

@321  Irish composer John Field's claim to fame is that he invented the Romantic type of piano piece called the "nocturne". Field (1782-1837), who was a student of Clementi, and who lived in Moscow for thirty years, is otherwise forgotten. However, the classic model of the nocturne, with its simple, atmospheric and emotive melody and harmonic accompaniment, is not, becoming famous in the hands of Chopin and Fauré. No. 5 in B-flat is quite short, for the most part resembling No. 1 in E-flat, but with a contrasting passage in chords.

@322  Irish composer John Field's claim to fame is that he invented the Romantic type of piano piece called the "nocturne". Field (1782-1837), who was a student of Clementi, and who lived in Moscow for thirty years, is otherwise forgotten. However, the classic model of the nocturne, with its simple, atmospheric and emotive melody and harmonic accompaniment, is not, becoming famous in the hands of Chopin and Fauré. No. 4 in A major is the finest of Field's nocturnes. It has both variety and exceptional emotional range.

@323  Although Franz Schubert (1797-1828) had trouble with large scale works of music, he excelled in the creation of both songs and short works for the piano, such as the Impromptus. His two sets of Impromptus, Opus 90 and Opus 142, were composed in 1828, just one year before his death. The short, improvised character of this type of music suited Schubert's temperament perfectly. The Impromptu in A-flat, Op. 142, No. 2, has a lyrical quality, and features a Trio section which has a hidden melodic line in the triplet figuration.

@324  Schumann used the term Fantasy Piece (Phantasiestück) to describe the many little piano works that portrayed his flights of fancy or flashes of inspiration. The eight Fantasy Pieces, Opus 12, were composed in 1837 and are a marvelous display of Schumann's imaginative best. Fable, No. 6 in the set, is a whimsical and imaginative little piece, with passages of delicate staccato and a vigorous central climax.

@325  Brahms, like his contemporaries Chopin and Schumann, wrote highly personalized music. Many of his piano compositions have an orchestral quality. They show a deliberate, assured control of compositional techniques and understanding of rhythmic and melodic transformations. One often finds two melodic lines interwoven. During the last twenty years of his life, Brahms created many miniatures called Capriccios and Intermezzi that are introspective, lyrical expressions of genuine emotion. They show the musical finesse of a mature artistic genius who is not afraid to reveal his soul to the world.  They are the artistic creations of a mature mind aided by musical finesse that dispenses with meaningless virtuoso display. The Romance in F, Opus 118, No. 5 is of the same mold. It has a rich, warmth of feeling and lyrical melody. There is delicate variation in the middle section.

@326  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the great virtuoso pianists of the 20th century and an accomplished composer, especially for his own instrument. It is natural that he created difficult transcriptions of favorite works by other composers to perform in his own concerts, much as Liszt had done in the 19th century. This is an unsentimental but sparkling arrangement of a Bach Gigue.

@327  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the great virtuoso pianists of the 20th century and an accomplished composer, especially for his own instrument. It is natural that he created difficult transcriptions of favorite works by other composers to perform in his own concerts, much as Liszt had done in the 19th century. The sentimental Liebesfreud and Liebesleid by his contemporary violinist Fritz Kreisler are wonderfully done.

@328  Spanish composer Manuel de Falla (1876-1946) first produced his 2-act opera La Vida Breve (Short Life) in 1913. This is this first of two colorful Spanish dances taken from the opera and arranged for piano by French composer Gustave Samazeuilh.

@329  Brahms, like his contemporaries Chopin and Schumann, wrote highly personalized music. Many of his piano compositions have an orchestral quality. They show a deliberate, assured control of compositional techniques and understanding of rhythmic and melodic transformations. One often finds two melodic lines interwoven. During the last twenty years of his life, Brahms created many miniatures called Capriccios and Intermezzi that are introspective, lyrical expressions of genuine emotion. They show the musical finesse of a mature artistic genius who is not afraid to reveal his soul to the world.  They are the artistic creations of a mature mind aided by musical finesse that dispenses with meaningless virtuoso display. The popular Intermezzo in C, Opus 119, No. 3 has easy grace spiced with subtle cross-rhythms. The melody can be found hiding in the middle of the texture. Opus 119 is the last set of piano pieces composed by Brahms.

@330  Brahms, like his contemporaries Chopin and Schumann, wrote highly personalized music. Many of his piano compositions have an orchestral quality. They show a deliberate, assured control of compositional techniques and understanding of rhythmic and melodic transformations. One often finds two melodic lines interwoven. During the last twenty years of his life, Brahms created many miniatures called Capriccios and Intermezzi that are introspective, lyrical expressions of genuine emotion. They show the musical finesse of a mature artistic genius who is not afraid to reveal his soul to the world.  They are the artistic creations of a mature mind aided by musical finesse that dispenses with meaningless virtuoso display. The heroic Rhapsody in E-flat, Opus 119, No. 4, is mixed in with the Intermezzi. It requires bold, powerful chord playing and a feeling for climax. Opus 119 is the last set of piano pieces composed by Brahms

@331  The Lieder ohne Worte (Songs without Words) continued Schubert's tradition of writing short, lyrical pieces for the piano. Melodic or lyric style is combined with harmonic, instrumental style. Felix Mendelssohn (1809-1847) wrote a total of 48 Songs without Words, published in sets of six. The first edition, published in London, had the title Original Melodies for the Pianoforte. The second edition appeared as Songs without Words. Most of the pieces have characteristic titles, but except for a few, were all added by editors and pianists (promotional gimmicks existed even in the 19th century). Although he never publicly protested the titles, his personal letters indicate that he never approved of these "poetic appendages". Rather than trying to capture the spirit of something specific, they are glimpses of more fundamental emotional and musical feelings.  Opus 102 and Opus 85 were published by Simrock after the composer's death.

@332  Although in four voices, the Fugue No. 1 in C major (from Book 1 of J.S. Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier) is not very difficult to play. It's themes are clear and bright in character. The entries of the voices are natural and easy to distinguish.

@333  The Prelude No. 8 in E-flat minor (from Book 1 of the Well-Tempered Clavier) opens with simple but sublime poise. The cantabile melody flows gently, punctuated with the opening chord motif. Wohltemperiertes Klavier, or Well-Tempered Clavier, was published by Bach in two volumes of 24 Preludes and Fugues each. They have become such a staple of keyboard literature that they are often referred to merely as "the forty-eight". The first was released in 1722, and the second around 1740. By using all major and minor keys, Bach demonstrated the advantages of the newly invented "equal tempered" tuning. Older tuning methods sounded pleasing in a limited number of related keys. Performers would often re-tune their instruments for the pieces they were going to play. As music became more chromatic and also moved more freely through different keys, an equal temperament tuning system (which tried to "average" the distance between notes) was a great advantage. Equal tempered tuning remains in use today.

@334  The Fugue No. 8 in E-flat minor (from J.S. Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier Book 1) is stately in character. It is in three voices and is not-technically difficult. However, it's length and design require some understanding in order to build an effective climax.

@335  The Prelude No. 9 in E major is from Book 1 of J.S. Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier. The easy grace of the 12/8 metre combined with the charming cantabile melody is most appealing. Wohltemperiertes Klavier, or Well-Tempered Clavier, was published by Bach in two volumes of 24 Preludes and Fugues each. They have become such a staple of keyboard literature that they are often referred to merely as "the forty-eight". The first was released in 1722, and the second around 1740. By using all major and minor keys, Bach demonstrated the advantages of the newly invented "equal tempered" tuning. Older tuning methods sounded pleasing in a limited number of related keys. Performers would often re-tune their instruments for the pieces they were going to play. As music became more chromatic and also moved more freely through different keys, an equal temperament tuning system (which tried to "average" the distance between notes) was a great advantage. Equal tempered tuning remains in use today.

@336  The Fugue No. 9 in E major is from Book 1 of J.S. Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier. It is in three voices and quite short. The passages are mainly in sixteenth notes and have great rhythmic verve and bright character.

@337  No. 22 in B-flat minor is one of the longest of the Preludes in J.S. Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier (Book 1). It's contrapuntal style and rhythmic flow of eighth notes gives it both a serious and sturdy character. Wohltemperiertes Klavier, or Well-Tempered Clavier, was published by Bach in two volumes of 24 Preludes and Fugues each. They have become such a staple of keyboard literature that they are often referred to merely as "the forty-eight". The first was released in 1722, and the second around 1740. By using all major and minor keys, Bach demonstrated the advantages of the newly invented "equal tempered" tuning. Older tuning methods sounded pleasing in a limited number of related keys. Performers would often re-tune their instruments for the pieces they were going to play. As music became more chromatic and also moved more freely through different keys, an equal temperament tuning system (which tried to "average" the distance between notes) was a great advantage. Equal tempered tuning remains in use today.

@338  The Fugue No. 22 in B-flat minor is from J.S. Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1. It is both quick and rhythmically energetic. The balancing of the three voices requires careful tonal control.

@339  Feux d'artifice (Fireworks) is the final Prelude in Debussy's second book of Preludes (1913). Like Chopin, Debussy composed twenty-four  Preludes (twelve in each of two books), and Feux d'artifice is the most spectacular. It was composed in 1913 and consists mainly of the left and right hand taking turns in sweeping arpeggios and difficult figuration. The music paints a remarkably vivid picture. In a flash of French patriotism, Debussy throws in a reference to the Marseillaise at the end.

@340  Like composers before and after him, Chopin used dance forms as a vehicle for his musical expression. The Mazurka is a good example. It is a Polish folk dance in triple metre with the main accent on the second or third beat. Chopin wrote over fifty Mazurkas, retaining the native charm and unique spirit, but elevating this little dance to an art form reflecting all of his emotions. Each one is unique. The early ones, like some of Chopin's early waltzes, are more in the spirit of actual dances. Later, they become increasingly stylized. Chopin rarely uses Polish folk melody, instead creating his own unique melody inspired by his native land. Rather than using major or minor, the melodies are often modal. There is a rich variety of rhythm patterns, and the Mazurkas consistently show daring harmonic ingenuity. The Mazurka in B-flat minor, Op. 24, No. 4, has an original two-voice main idea. In the mournful Coda, the music dies away at the end.

@341  Like composers before and after him, Chopin used dance forms as a vehicle for his musical expression. The Mazurka is a good example. It is a Polish folk dance in triple metre with the main accent on the second or third beat. Chopin wrote over fifty Mazurkas, retaining the native charm and unique spirit, but elevating this little dance to an art form reflecting all of his emotions. Each one is unique. The early ones, like some of Chopin's early waltzes, are more in the spirit of actual dances. Later, they become increasingly stylized. Chopin rarely uses Polish folk melody, instead creating his own unique melody inspired by his native land. Rather than using major or minor, the melodies are often modal. There is a rich variety of rhythm patterns, and the Mazurkas consistently show daring harmonic ingenuity. The Mazurka in C-sharp minor, Op. 30, No. 4, departs from convention with a chromatic descent of seventh chords just before fading out at the end.

@342  Like composers before and after him, Chopin used dance forms as a vehicle for his musical expression. The Mazurka is a good example. It is a Polish folk dance in triple metre with the main accent on the second or third beat. Chopin wrote over fifty Mazurkas, retaining the native charm and unique spirit, but elevating this little dance to an art form reflecting all of his emotions. Each one is unique. The early ones, like some of Chopin's early waltzes, are more in the spirit of actual dances. Later, they become increasingly stylized. Chopin rarely uses Polish folk melody, instead creating his own unique melody inspired by his native land. Rather than using major or minor, the melodies are often modal. There is a rich variety of rhythm patterns, and the Mazurkas consistently show daring harmonic ingenuity. The Mazurka in D, Op. 33, No. 2, has a direct, rustic character with a deliberate simplicity of harmony.

@343  Like composers before and after him, Chopin used dance forms as a vehicle for his musical expression. The Mazurka is a good example. It is a Polish folk dance in triple metre with the main accent on the second or third beat. Chopin wrote over fifty Mazurkas, retaining the native charm and unique spirit, but elevating this little dance to an art form reflecting all of his emotions. Each one is unique. The early ones, like some of Chopin's early waltzes, are more in the spirit of actual dances. Later, they become increasingly stylized. Chopin rarely uses Polish folk melody, instead creating his own unique melody inspired by his native land. Rather than using major or minor, the melodies are often modal. There is a rich variety of rhythm patterns, and the Mazurkas consistently show daring harmonic ingenuity. The Mazurka in A minor,  Op. 68, No. 2 was composed in 1827. It is slow and the opening melody somewhat exotic sounding. The slightly faster middle section is in A major and takes on a lighter tone.

@344   Like composers before and after him, Chopin used dance forms as a vehicle for his musical expression. The Mazurka is a good example. It is a Polish folk dance in triple metre with the main accent on the second or third beat. Chopin wrote over fifty Mazurkas, retaining the native charm and unique spirit, but elevating this little dance to an art form reflecting all of his emotions. Each one is unique. The early ones, like some of Chopin's early waltzes, are more in the spirit of actual dances. Later, they become increasingly stylized. Chopin rarely uses Polish folk melody, instead creating his own unique melody inspired by his native land. Rather than using major or minor, the melodies are often modal. There is a rich variety of rhythm patterns, and the Mazurkas consistently show daring harmonic ingenuity. The Mazurka in F, Op. 68, No. 3 was composed in 1830. It's opening chords are like a fanfare and it has a heroic mood. The curious middle section features a drone-like left hand accompaniment.

@345  Like composers before and after him, Chopin used dance forms as a vehicle for his musical expression. The Mazurka is a good example. It is a Polish folk dance in triple metre with the main accent on the second or third beat. Chopin wrote over fifty Mazurkas, retaining the native charm and unique spirit, but elevating this little dance to an art form reflecting all of his emotions. Each one is unique. The early ones, like some of Chopin's early waltzes, are more in the spirit of actual dances. Later, they become increasingly stylized. Chopin rarely uses Polish folk melody, instead creating his own unique melody inspired by his native land. Rather than using major or minor, the melodies are often modal. There is a rich variety of rhythm patterns, and the Mazurkas consistently show daring harmonic ingenuity. The Mazurka in A-flat, Op. 59, No. 2, has one of the most charming melodies of the entire collection. Listen for the remarkable passage of chromatic harmony that leads into the Coda.

@346  In each of his four Ballades, Chopin uses two main melodic ideas. Turning away from the constraints of traditional classical forms such as the Sonata or Rondo, he freely calls on any of the compositional techniques to tell his tale. Although his contemporary Romantics would have liked to connect specific poems or stories to these large scale compositions, they are portrayals of emotion and lyricism in a purely musical sense. On a spiritual level, they have an affinity to the great German Romantic ballads of Schiller and Goethe, or the legend-inspired works of Polish poets Mickiewicz or Slovatski. The third Ballade in A-flat, Op. 47, was first published in 1840. According to Liszt, it was improvised on the spot for the German poet Heinrich Heine. Supposedly, Chopin wanted to give a musical comment on the Mickiewicz's poem "Willi" (telling the adventures of Ondine in the lost city under the sea). It has an wonderful lyricism and grace. Technically, it is the least difficult of the four.

@347  Franz Schubert's six Moments Musicals, Opus 94, were first published in 1828. While Schubert found his strength in the creation of songs for voice and piano, he admittedly had trouble composing large-scale piano works. The short, almost improvisatory nature of character pieces such the Moments Musicals and his Impromptus was a perfect vehicle for his musical expression. No. 1 in C major is simple, and somewhat reminiscent of Schumann.

@348  Franz Schubert's six Moments Musicals, Opus 94, were first published in 1828. While Schubert found his strength in the creation of songs for voice and piano, he admittedly had trouble composing large-scale piano works. The short, almost improvisatory nature of character pieces such the Moments Musicals and his Impromptus was a perfect vehicle for his musical expression. No. 2 in A-flat has sustained lyricism and a poetical character.

@349  Franz Schubert's six Moments Musicals, Opus 94, were first published in 1828. While Schubert found his strength in the creation of songs for voice and piano, he admittedly had trouble composing large-scale piano works. The short, almost improvisatory nature of character pieces such the Moments Musicals and his Impromptus was a perfect vehicle for his musical expression. No. 4 is written in a three-part form with two main themes, one built on sixteenth notes and the other with a characteristic rhythm.

@350  Franz Schubert's six Moments Musicals, Opus 94, were first published in 1828. While Schubert found his strength in the creation of songs for voice and piano, he admittedly had trouble composing large-scale piano works. The short, almost improvisatory nature of character pieces such the Moments Musicals and his Impromptus was a perfect vehicle for his musical expression. No. 5 in F minor features vigorous chord playing.

@351  Franz Schubert's six Moments Musicals, Opus 94, were first published in 1828. While Schubert found his strength in the creation of songs for voice and piano, he admittedly had trouble composing large-scale piano works. The short, almost improvisatory nature of character pieces such the Moments Musicals and his Impromptus was a perfect vehicle for his musical expression. No. 6 in A-flat is an expressively lyrical piece, with legato chords throughout, and an almost sighing effect.

@352  J.S. Bach (1685-1750) originally composed the fifteen Two-part Inventions and fifteen Sinfonias (or Three-part Inventions)  for his son Wilhelm Friedemann. In what was called the Clavierbüchlein (Little Keyboard Book), the Inventions were listed as Preambles and Fantasias. Bach revised them in 1723 and they were then titled Inventions and Sinfonias (Inventionen und Sinfonien). His introduction reads: "Upright instructions wherein the lovers of the clavier, and especially those desirous of learning, are shown a clear way not alone (1) to learn to play clearly in two voices, but also, after further progress, (2) to deal correctly and well with three obbligato parts; furthermore, at the same time not alone to have good inventions, but to develop the same well, and above all to arrive at a singing style in playing and at the same time to acquire a strong foretaste of composition." They are mainly in simple song form (A B A) with each hand carrying a melody.

@353  J.S. Bach (1685-1750) originally composed the fifteen Two-part Inventions and fifteen Sinfonias (or Three-part Inventions)  for his son Wilhelm Friedemann. In what was called the Clavierbüchlein (Little Keyboard Book), the Inventions were listed as Preambles and Fantasias. Bach revised them in 1723 and they were then titled Inventions and Sinfonias (Inventionen und Sinfonien). His introduction reads: "Upright instructions wherein the lovers of the clavier, and especially those desirous of learning, are shown a clear way not alone (1) to learn to play clearly in two voices, but also, after further progress, (2) to deal correctly and well with three obbligato parts; furthermore, at the same time not alone to have good inventions, but to develop the same well, and above all to arrive at a singing style in playing and at the same time to acquire a strong foretaste of composition." They are mainly in simple song form (A B A) with each hand carrying a melody.

@354  J.S. Bach (1685-1750) originally composed the fifteen Two-part Inventions and fifteen Sinfonias (or Three-part Inventions)  for his son Wilhelm Friedemann. In what was called the Clavierbüchlein (Little Keyboard Book), the Inventions were listed as Preambles and Fantasias. Bach revised them in 1723 and they were then titled Inventions and Sinfonias (Inventionen und Sinfonien). His introduction reads: "Upright instructions wherein the lovers of the clavier, and especially those desirous of learning, are shown a clear way not alone (1) to learn to play clearly in two voices, but also, after further progress, (2) to deal correctly and well with three obbligato parts; furthermore, at the same time not alone to have good inventions, but to develop the same well, and above all to arrive at a singing style in playing and at the same time to acquire a strong foretaste of composition." They are mainly in simple song form (A B A) with each hand carrying a melody.

@355  Brahms, like his contemporaries Chopin and Schumann, wrote highly personalized music. Many of his piano compositions have an orchestral quality. They show a deliberate, assured control of compositional techniques and understanding of rhythmic and melodic transformations. One often finds two melodic lines interwoven. During the last twenty years of his life, Brahms created many miniatures called Capriccios and Intermezzi that are introspective, lyrical expressions of genuine emotion. They show the musical finesse of a mature artistic genius who is not afraid to reveal his soul to the world.  They are the artistic creations of a mature mind aided by musical finesse that dispenses with meaningless virtuoso display. The Intermezzo in A minor, Opus 118, No. 1, has sweeping power and subtle part-writing.

@356  Brahms, like his contemporaries Chopin and Schumann, wrote highly personalized music. Many of his piano compositions have an orchestral quality. They show a deliberate, assured control of compositional techniques and understanding of rhythmic and melodic transformations. One often finds two melodic lines interwoven. During the last twenty years of his life, Brahms created many miniatures called Capriccios and Intermezzi that are introspective, lyrical expressions of genuine emotion. They show the musical finesse of a mature artistic genius who is not afraid to reveal his soul to the world.  They are the artistic creations of a mature mind aided by musical finesse that dispenses with meaningless virtuoso display. The Intermezzo in F minor, Opus 118, No. 4, is not easy to interpret. It has interesting color effects and a canonic structure.

@357  In each of his four Ballades, Chopin uses two main melodic ideas. Turning away from the constraints of traditional classical forms such as the Sonata or Rondo, he freely calls on any of the compositional techniques to tell his tale. Although his contemporary Romantics would have liked to connect specific poems or stories to these large scale compositions, they are portrayals of emotion and lyricism in a purely musical sense. On a spiritual level, they have an affinity to the great German Romantic ballads of Schiller and Goether, or the legend-inspired works of Polish poets Mickiewicz or Slovatski. The fourth Ballade in F minor, Op. 52, is supposedly inspired by the Lithuanian ballad of the Budrys, about heroism and love during the Lettons' war against the Russians, Teutons and Poles. It is one of the finest of Chopin's later works, demanding  technical strength (especially in the Coda) as well as great musical imagination and savvy.

@358  J.S. Bach began to compose his six English Suites before his French Suites, although they were completed later. As with the "French" Suites, no one really knows the origin of the name "English", although a manuscript copy possessed by Bach's youngest son Johann Christian described the work as "fait pour les Anglais" (made for the English). Bach was perhaps inspired by the suites of Charles Dieupart, a reputable French composer who worked mostly in England. He is known to have copied out several movements from Dieupart's suites to use as models for his own compositions. All of these suites begin with a Prelude, and standard dance movements, such as the Courante and Sarabande, are included. The Gavotte of Suite No. 3 in G major is pleasant and not difficult to play.

@359  Having churned out sonata after mammoth sonata, essentially defining large scale musical thought on the piano, it is remarkable that Beethoven would take the time to create sparkling little miniatures in the form of his 26 Bagatelles. They are indeed musical "trifles", as the term is defined. The spirit is light and fleeting, and perhaps for Beethoven their creation was a diversion from the deep thoughts of his major works. There are eleven Bagatelles in his Opus 119 set (composed in 1821) that are generally easy to play.

@360  However one imagines Beethoven in his late career, as he agonized over things like his Ninth Symphony or final String Quartets and Piano Sonatas, he obviously retained a sense of humor. The Rondo a Capriccio, Op. 129, or Rage over a lost Groschen (non-German's have transformed a Groschen into a Penny) is one of his last compositions. Although once considered to be an early work, it was apparently written between 1825-6, a few years after his final Symphony and published posthumously. It is moderately difficult to play and boisterously humorous in character.

@361  Chopin's twenty-four Preludes, Op. 28, were composed from 1836-8 and first published in 1839. They are very much like Bach's preludes in the Well-Tempered Clavier, not in technical style but in basic concept. In keeping with his predecessor, Chopin wrote twenty-four of them (plus another two later on), one in every possible key. Often the prelude is based on a single idea, sometimes only a motive. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes do not precede anything. They are self-contained musical pictures. Heard as a set, they form a rainbow of changing expression. Heard individually, each is an inspired capsule of artistic emotion. No. 11 in B is a short, perpetual motion style prelude with some tricky groups of double notes.

@362  Chopin's twenty-four Preludes, Op. 28, were composed from 1836-8 and first published in 1839. They are very much like Bach's preludes in the Well-Tempered Clavier, not in technical style but in basic concept. In keeping with his predecessor, Chopin wrote twenty-four of them (plus another two later on), one in every possible key. Often the prelude is based on a single idea, sometimes only a motive. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes do not precede anything. They are self-contained musical pictures. Heard as a set, they form a rainbow of changing expression. Heard individually, each is an inspired capsule of artistic emotion. No. 12 in F is one of the most difficult of the set.

@363  Chopin's twenty-four Preludes, Op. 28, were composed from 1836-8 and first published in 1839. They are very much like Bach's preludes in the Well-Tempered Clavier, not in technical style but in basic concept. In keeping with his predecessor, Chopin wrote twenty-four of them (plus another two later on), one in every possible key. Often the prelude is based on a single idea, sometimes only a motive. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes do not precede anything. They are self-contained musical pictures. Heard as a set, they form a rainbow of changing expression. Heard individually, each is an inspired capsule of artistic emotion. No. 20 in C minor, built on chords, is one of the simpler Preludes.

@364  Chopin's twenty-four Preludes were composed from 1836-8 and first published in 1839. They are very much like Bach's preludes in the Well-Tempered Clavier, not in technical style but in basic concept. In keeping with his predecessor, Chopin wrote twenty-four of them (plus another later on), one in every possible key. Often the prelude is based on a single idea, sometimes only a motive. Unlike Bach, Chopin's Preludes do not precede anything. They are self-contained musical pictures. Heard as a set, they form a rainbow of changing expression. Heard individually, each is an inspired capsule of artistic emotion. No. 24 in G minor is filled with drama and passion. It is one of the most difficult of the Preludes.

@365  In each of his four Ballades, Chopin uses two main melodic ideas. Turning away from the constraints of traditional classical forms such as the Sonata or Rondo, he freely calls on any of the compositional techniques to tell his tale. Although his contemporary Romantics would have liked to connect specific poems or stories to these large scale compositions, they are portrayals of emotion and lyricism in a purely musical sense. On a spiritual level, they have an affinity to the great German Romantic ballads of Schiller and Goether, or the legend-inspired works of Polish poets Mickiewicz or Slovatski. The Ballade No. 2 in F, Op. 38, was first published in 1840. Although their are many tests of the pianist's endurance and technique, Chopin calls for a great deal of musical sensitivity.

@366  Mouvement is the third piece in Debussy's first book of Images (1905). As suggested by the title, it is a swirling, whirlwind of notes. Of his Images Book 1, Debussy wrote, "I think I may say, without undue pride, that I believe that these three pieces will live and will take their place in piano literature, either to the left of Schumann or to the right of Chopin."

@367  Although many Russian composers take pleasure in writing for children, Kabalevsky seems to be outstanding in his flair for meeting the problems of young players. There is a vividness to the style that catches the attention of young students and the pianistic settings are always interesting and colorful without being too demanding. Kabalevsky's The Clown is No. 20 from Fifteen Children's Pieces, Op. 27.

@368  Although many Russian composers take pleasure in writing for children, Kabalevsky seems to be outstanding in his flair for meeting the problems of young players. There is a vividness to the style that catches the attention of young students and the pianistic settings are always interesting and colorful without being too demanding. Kabalevsky's Toccatina is No. 7 from Fifteen Children's Pieces, Op. 27.

@369  Although many Russian composers take pleasure in writing for children, Kabalevsky seems to be outstanding in his flair for meeting the problems of young players. There is a vividness to the style that catches the attention of young students and the pianistic settings are always interesting and colorful without being too demanding. The Rondo-Toccata, Op. 60, is an exciting, energetic piece which is very popular with piano students.

@370  Claude Debussy (1862-1918) was a master of the piano. His compositions combine music finesse with a rich palette of piano sonorities. Like Chopin, a composer he admired and often emulated, Debussy composed Nocturnes, Preludes and Etudes, mainly avoiding large scale works in the German tradition. He composed Le petit negre (the little negro) when he was only seventeen years old. Compared to Debussy's later works, the happy rhythmic vigor and cheerful melody of this piece shows its youth. Perhaps this is why it has been favored by so many piano students.

@371  Gabriel Fauré (1845-1924) was one of France's most revered composers, regarded within his native land as a classicist maintaining the centuries old French tradition of balance and clarity of expression. The harmony in his piano music is often conceived in a linear way with chords spread out into arpeggios. The constant modulation of his harmonies gives the music a fluid, mesmerizing quality. The Barcarolles and Nocturnes are his most important piano compositions. The Barcarolle in A-flat, Opus 44, is both a very effective and distinctive piano work.

@372  Gabriel Fauré (1845-1924) was one of France's most revered composers, regarded within his native land as a classicist maintaining the centuries old French tradition of balance and clarity of expression. The harmony in his piano music is often conceived in a linear way with chords spread out into arpeggios. The constant modulation of his harmonies gives the music a fluid, mesmerizing quality. The Barcarolles and Nocturnes are his most important piano compositions. The Barcarolle is atmospheric music which reflects the rhythm of waves. The Barcarolle in A minor, Opus 26, is a quite short, and consists mainly of a flowing melody with an accompaniment.

@373  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the finest virtuoso pianists of the 20th century. He also excelled as a composer in the tradition of Chopin and Liszt, using rich harmonies and sonorities as well as elaborate technical embellishment  to support  his memorable melodies. Like Chopin, he wrote numerous Preludes.  Each is a beautifully crafted, enchanting pianistic treasure. The Prelude in B minor, Op. 32, No. 10, dates from 1910. It is perhaps the finest of the Preludes, a composition of nobility and grandeur.

@374  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the finest virtuoso pianists of the 20th century. He also excelled as a composer in the tradition of Chopin and Liszt, using rich harmonies and sonorities as well as elaborate technical embellishment  to support  his memorable melodies. Like Chopin, he wrote numerous Preludes. Each is a beautifully crafted, enchanting pianistic treasure. The thirteen Preludes of Opus 32 appeared in 1910 and show Rachmaninov at the peak of his keyboard compositional style. 

@375  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the finest virtuoso pianists of the 20th century. He also excelled as a composer in the tradition of Chopin and Liszt, using rich harmonies and sonorities as well as elaborate technical embellishment  to support  his memorable melodies. Like Chopin, he wrote numerous Preludes. Each is a beautifully crafted, enchanting pianistic treasure. The ten Preludes of Opus 23 were composed in 1904. No. 6 in E-flat is a little sweet with great melodic charm.

@376  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the finest virtuoso pianists of the 20th century. He also excelled as a composer in the tradition of Chopin and Liszt, using rich harmonies and sonorities as well as elaborate technical embellishment  to support  his memorable melodies. Like Chopin, he wrote numerous Preludes. Each is a beautifully crafted, enchanting pianistic treasure. The ten Preludes of Opus 23 were composed in 1904.

@377  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the finest virtuoso pianists of the 20th century. He also excelled as a composer in the tradition of Chopin and Liszt, using rich harmonies and sonorities as well as elaborate technical embellishment  to support  his memorable melodies. Like Chopin, he wrote numerous Preludes. Each is a beautifully crafted, enchanting pianistic treasure. The ten Preludes of Opus 23 were composed in 1904. No. 1 in F-sharp minor has fine emotional sweep.

@378  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the great virtuoso pianists of the 20th century and an accomplished composer, especially for his own instrument. He composed two sets of Etudes Tableaux (Opus 33 and 39). Opus 39 appeared in 1917. They are real Etudes in sonority and expressiveness as well as technical difficulties. But they are also Tableaux in the sense of pictures or dramatic concepts in sonority. No. 5 in E-flat minor is filled with passion. It opens with a stern melody accompanied by stormy, triplet chords. The intensity of feeling is maintained throughout its substantial length.

@379  Debussy released his collection of piano music called Estampes  (Pagodes, Soirée dans Grenade, Jardins sous la pluie) in 1903. Soirée dans Grenade (Evening in Granada) is remarkably successful in creating a Spanish atmosphere, even though there it contains no authentic Spanish melody. In the words of the great Spanish composer Manuel de Falla, "The force of imagination concentrated in the few pages of 'La Soirée dans Grenade' approaches the marvelous when it is borne in mind that they were written by a stranger guided almost exclusively by the visions of his genius... the whole piece to its smallest detail is redolent of Spain."  A Habanera rhythm accompanies five short themes of distinct character. There are two guitar-like interruptions, and the work ends with the return of the plaintive opening melody.

@380  After a performance of music by Cécile Chaminade (1857-1944), all-round artist Ambroise Thomas wrote, "This is not a woman who composes, but a composer who is a woman." That was quite a statement for a man at the end of the 1800's showing just how highly regarded Chaminade was in her native France. She was renowned as a virtuoso pianist, composer and conductor. Her music is characterized by expressive melody and sparkling rhythms. She composed many salon type piano works. The Pas des écharpes (Scarf Dance) is a good example. It is graceful, rhythmical and easy to play.

@381  After a performance of music by Cécile Chaminade (1857-1944), all-round artist Ambroise Thomas wrote, "This is not a woman who composes, but a composer who is a woman." That was quite a statement for a man at the end of the 1800's showing just how highly regarded Chaminade was in her native France. She was renowned as a virtuoso pianist, composer and conductor. Her music is characterized by expressive melody and sparkling rhythms, and she composed many salon type piano works. Chaminade's major work Callirhoë, Op. 37, a ballet symphony, was first performed in 1888. This Air de ballet is taken from it.

@382  After a performance of music by Cécile Chaminade (1857-1944), all-round artist Ambroise Thomas wrote, "This is not a woman who composes, but a composer who is a woman." That was quite a statement for a man at the end of the 1800's showing just how highly regarded Chaminade was in her native France. She was renowned as a virtuoso pianist, composer and conductor. Her music is characterized by expressive melody and sparkling rhythms. She composed many salon type piano works such as the Sérénade, Op. 29.

@383  Anton Rubinstein (1829-1894) was one of the greatest pianists of his time, quite capable of  challenging the performing prowess of Franz Liszt.  Like Liszt, he yearned to be known as a serious composer. He wrote over two hundred pieces for piano, performing them in his own recitals. It appeared that audiences came to hear his pianism, rather than his compositions. They have generally been forgotten, although their characteristic sentimentality and suave melody can been found in attractive little pieces such as the Romance in E-flat and his Melodies, Op. 3.

@384  Anton Rubinstein (1829-1894) was one of the greatest pianists of his time, quite capable of  challenging the performing prowess of Franz Liszt.  Like Liszt, he yearned to be known as a serious composer. He wrote over two hundred pieces for piano, performing them in his own recitals. It appeared that audiences came to hear his pianism, rather than his compositions. They have generally been forgotten, although their characteristic sentimentality and suave melody can been found in attractive little pieces such as the Romance in E-flat and his Melodies, Op. 3.

@385  Ernesto Lecuona (1896-1963) was a Cuban composer of popular music. He began playing the piano as a child and wrote his first song when we as only eleven years old. He graduated from the National Conservatory of Havana in 1911 and toured South America and Europe with his Cuban dance band. Malagueña and Andalucia (from his Andalucia Suite) are among his most successful and popular melodies.

@386  Ernesto Lecuona (1896-1963) was a Cuban composer of popular music. He began playing the piano as a child and wrote his first song when we as only eleven years old. He graduated from the National Conservatory of Havana in 1911 and toured South America and Europe with his Cuban dance band. Malagueña and Andalucia (from his Andalucia Suite) are among his most successful and popular melodies.

@387  Some of Edvard Grieg's (1843-1907) most characteristic work is to be found in the series of volumes entitled "Lyric Pieces". These short compositions have a strong national flavor and are influenced by the folk music of Norway. They are, almost without exception, technically simple and quite elementary in structure, with some similarity to Schumann's smaller pieces. This little piece is a sad memorial to Danish composer Niels Gade (1817-1890).

@388  Robert Schumann (1810-1855) wrote many sets of imaginative, short pieces where each individual musical sketch commented on the main title. His Noveletten, Op. 21 (1838) is such a set. No. 7 is perhaps the most appealing in the series. It features brilliant flying octaves and a charming central catilena.

@389  Chopin's nineteen Nocturnes are his most introspective and genuinely subjective works. Irish composer John Field (1782-1837) may get the credit for inventing the piano Nocturne in the form of a lyrical, expressive melody supported by harmony, but it is Chopin who raised the form to its highest level. Most have a basic ternary (A B A) form, however, Chopin develops the basic melody with his own magical kind of ornamentation. Sometimes the melodies become very elaborate with cadenza-like flourishes, while undulating broken figures in the bass give support. The mood is generally meditative, in keeping with the title. The Nocturne in G minor, Op. 15, No. 3, is one of the easiest in the collection.

@390  Chopin's twelve Etudes, Op. 10, were composed between 1829-32, and first published in 1833. The twelve Etudes of Opus 25 were composed from 1832-6. Within these works are the essence of the composer's distinctive traits, including fluidity of harmony, richness of melodic invention and a highly personal, inner vitality. As one would expect from the title, each "etude" exploits one particular problem of pianism. However, Chopin's technical problems do not outweigh the sheer musicality and artistry of this works. The difficult Etude No.9 in G-flat, Op. 25, has been nicknamed the "Butterfly" etude. With the joyful mood and delicate but persistent figuration, the title seems appropriate.

@391  Although the Fantasia in C minor and this Sonata in C minor, K. 457, were written at different times and can be played separately, they were associated by the composer and have a spiritual affinity. Each of them has a kind of grandeur that is rarely met with in Mozart's compositions for solo piano. The astonishing freedom and range of tonality in the fantasia would alone make it noteworthy. The sonata is a worthy counterpart. It is hardly fanciful to notice in some of the passages of the first and last movements a kinship with the great concerto (K.491) in the same key. The slow movement is perhaps the finest in the solo sonatas.

@392  Although the Fantasia in C minor and this Sonata in C minor, K. 457, were written at different times and can be played separately, they were associated by the composer and have a spiritual affinity. Each of them has a kind of grandeur that is rarely met with in Mozart's compositions for solo piano. The astonishing freedom and range of tonality in the fantasia would alone make it noteworthy. The sonata is a worthy counterpart. It is hardly fanciful to notice in some of the passages of the first and last movements a kinship with the great concerto (K.491) in the same key. The slow movement is perhaps the finest in the solo sonatas.

@393  Although the Fantasia in C minor and this Sonata in C minor, K. 457, were written at different times and can be played separately, they were associated by the composer and have a spiritual affinity. Each of them has a kind of grandeur that is rarely met with in Mozart's compositions for solo piano. The astonishing freedom and range of tonality in the fantasia would alone make it noteworthy. The sonata is a worthy counterpart. It is hardly fanciful to notice in some of the passages of the first and last movements a kinship with the great concerto (K.491) in the same key. The slow movement is perhaps the finest in the solo sonatas.

@394  Joseph Haydn (1732-1809), perhaps one of the most good natured and successful composers of all time, wrote more than fifty piano sonatas. Like Mozart, Haydn's sonatas are largely in three movements, although he liked to experiment, sometimes offering only two movements, and sometimes even four. In keeping with his buoyant personality, the music is consistently creative and lively. No. 37 in D, one of the most popular sonatas, belongs with a group of ten  that were composed from 1774-84 and show great lyricism and ornamentation. The first movement of No. 37 (Allegro con brio) bursts with joy and rhythmic energy.

@395  Joseph Haydn (1732-1809), perhaps one of the most good natured and successful composers of all time, wrote more than fifty piano sonatas. Like Mozart, Haydn's sonatas are largely in three movements, although he liked to experiment, sometimes offering only two movements, and sometimes even four. In keeping with his buoyant personality, the music is consistently creative and lively. No. 37 in D, one of the most popular sonatas, belongs with a group of ten  that were composed from 1774-84 and show great lyricism and ornamentation. The second movement, Large e sostenuto, is only a short expressive interlude.

@396  Joseph Haydn (1732-1809), perhaps one of the most good natured and successful composers of all time, wrote more than fifty piano sonatas. Like Mozart, Haydn's sonatas are largely in three movements, although he liked to experiment, sometimes offering only two movements, and sometimes even four. In keeping with his buoyant personality, the music is consistently creative and lively. No. 37 in D, one of the most popular sonatas, belongs with a group of ten  that were composed from 1774-84 and show great lyricism and ornamentation. The vigorous third movement Finale features a lively theme that appears three times, separated by highly contrasting interludes.

@397  Robert Schumann wrote many Fantasiestücke (fantasy pieces) during his career. The term from the writer-musician Ernst Theodor Amadeus Hoffmann (1776-1822), a writer-musician who had a big influence on Schumann. These short pieces were grouped in sets and intended to be played in sequence, although they work well as individual works. These little flashes of inspiration sometimes are mystical, explore subtle emotional feelings, or simply revel in nature. The three Fantasiestücke, Op. 111 were composed in 1851. No. 1 in C minor is difficult to play. It is filled with passion and inspiration.

@398  Robert Schumann wrote many Fantasiestücke (fantasy pieces) during his career. The term from the writer-musician Ernst Theodor Amadeus Hoffmann (1776-1822), a writer-musician who had a big influence on Schumann. These short pieces were grouped in sets and intended to be played in sequence, although they work well as individual works. These little flashes of inspiration sometimes are mystical, explore subtle emotional feelings, or simply revel in nature. The three Fantasiestücke, Op. 111 were composed in 1851. No. 2 in A-flat has a lovely lyricism and is quite simple to play.

@399  Robert Schumann wrote many Fantasiestücke (fantasy pieces) during his career. The term from the writer-musician Ernst Theodor Amadeus Hoffmann (1776-1822), a writer-musician who had a big influence on Schumann. These short pieces were grouped in sets and intended to be played in sequence, although they work well as individual works. These little flashes of inspiration sometimes are mystical, explore subtle emotional feelings, or simply revel in nature. The three Fantasiestücke, Op. 111 were composed in 1851. No. 3 in C minor has an energetic march-like tune, with a contrasting middle section and a coda which features graceful arabesques.

@400  J.S. Bach's six Partitas are part of a four-volume series called Clavierübung (Keyboard Exercise), which the composer published between 1731 and 1742. They show a great deal of variety, both in their character and in the unconventional choice and arrangement of the dance movements. In fact, the Allemande, Courante, Sarabande and Gigue, which Bach always uses in his Suites, do not always find their way into the Partitas. As well, the introductory movements show many different faces, from the stately French Overtures of Partitas Nos. 4 & 7, to the opening Toccata of No. 6, or the short Praeludium of No. 1. Partita No. 1 in B-flat is the most delicate of the set. 

@401  Andrei Schülz-Evler was a Polish pianist who lived from 1852-1905. He studied at the Warsaw Conservatory, then with Tausig in Berlin. He was a piano professor at the Kharkov Music School from 1888-1904. Among his 52 published piano works and songs was this once popular, extremely difficult transcription of Strauss' famous Blue Danube Waltz. Our pianist Valerie Tryon remembers this as part of a "Tom and Jerry" cartoon where the cat learns that the mouse is fond of music, begins to work at a "teach yourself the piano" book and ends up playing this music. Unfortunately, the sheet music is not readily available in North America but is still published in Europe.

@402  No one knows where the title French Suites came from. Bach, who composed them in 1722, only called them "Suites pour le clavecin". Nevertheless, they are elegant sets of dances with a rich variety of melodic and rhythmic invention, certainly earning the reputation as Bach's best examples of genre. Suite No. 5 in G major is considered the finest of the six French Suites. The texture is mainly in two voices and have few technical difficulties. There are no Preludes, however, the standard dances — Allemande (grave and serious), Courante (lively), Sarabande (slow, lyrical and ornamented), and Gigue — are present.

@403  Maurice Ravel (1875-1937) prefaces his Valses nobles et sentimentales with a quote from Henri de Régnier, "le plaisir délicieux et toujours nouveau d'une occupation inutile" (the constantly new and delicious pleasure of a useless occupation). It is yet more evidence of the composer's love for dance, seen orchestrally in works such as La Valse, and here in this eight  delightful waltzes composed in 1911. They are reminiscent of Johann Strauss or Franz Schubert, clearly intended to be played as a complete series. They display stylish command of the piano, with incisive rhythms, clearly drawn outlines and fresh sounding harmonies. The final waltz is really an Epilogue which quotes material heard in the previous waltzes.

@404  Oiseaux tristes (Mournful birds) is the second of the five pieces which make up Ravel's  Miroirs (1905). As suggested by the title, Ravel's intention is not to actually describe things in music but rather to "suggest", like reflections in a mirror. Oiseaux tristes is built on a repeated note figure and a hint of nostalgic melody. It is an imaginative work which requires refined touch to bring out its tonal beauty.

@405  Liszt's 6 Études d'exécution transcendante d'après Paganini appeared in 1838, and were later revised in 1851 as Grandes Études de Paganini. They are fine examples of the pianist/composer's flamboyant, early virtuoso works, and obviously based on the music of Liszt's legendary violin counterpart, Niccolò Paganini. All but No. 3, La campanella (based on the "Bell Rondo" from Paganini's Violin Concerto in B minor), are brilliant adaptations of difficult violin studies to the piano, capturing the essence of the originals but in a totally different media.

@406  Chopin's twelve Etudes, Op. 10, were composed between 1829-32, and first published in 1833. The twelve Etudes of Opus 25 were composed from 1832-6. Within these works are the essence of the composer's distinctive traits, including fluidity of harmony, richness of melodic invention and a highly personal, inner vitality. As one would expect from the title, each "etude" exploits one particular problem of pianism. However, Chopin's technical problems do not outweigh the sheer musicality and artistry of this works. The Etude in A minor, Op. 10, No. 2 is brilliant sounding. The right hand plays chromatic scales up and down the keyboard with just the 3rd, 4th and 5th finger while the left hand plays a simple, hopping chord accompaniment.

@407  Serge Rachmaninov (1873-1943) was one of the great virtuoso pianists of the 20th century and an accomplished composer, especially for his own instrument. It is natural that he created difficult transcriptions of favorite works by other composers to perform in his own concerts, much as Liszt had done in the 19th century. His arrangement of Mussorgsky's lively Hopak dance has great popular appeal.

@408  Maurice Ravel (1875-1937) composed Le tombeau de Couperin in 1917 in homage to the great French harpsichordist François Couperin (1668-1733). It was also a memorial to his friends that were killed in World War I, and each of the six pieces is dedicated to one friend. Forlane is a lovely work, with a poignantly beautiful melody and gentle, stinging harmonies.

@409  It is easy to underestimate the compositions of Gabriel Fauré  (1845-1924) for piano. They have a sort of aristocratic reserve, and like fine wines need time to fully savor and appreciate them. As well, many of them  have such similar character that they can sound repetitive. Nevertheless, Fauré's music displays impeccable craftsmanship, technical finish and  individuality. The Dolly Suite, Opus 56, for piano duet (two pianists at one piano) was composed between 1893-6 for the charming daughter of Emma Bardac (later to become Debussy's second wife). Little Dolly Bardac was to become the half-sister of Debussy's own daughter Chou-Chou (for whom Debussy composed his Children's Corner Suite). All the movements have an easy charm which one never tires of. They were later orchestrated by Henri Rabaud. This Berceuse was used as the theme music for a children's television show in Britain. The music would play as a gentle voice asked, "Are you all seated comfortably? Then let us begin." It reflects the tranquil environment of Dolly's childhood.

@410  It is easy to underestimate the compositions of Gabriel Fauré  (1845-1924) for piano. They have a sort of aristocratic reserve, and like fine wines need time to fully savor and appreciate them. As well, many of them  have such similar character that they can sound repetitive. Nevertheless, Fauré's music displays impeccable craftsmanship, technical finish and  individuality. The Dolly Suite, Opus 56, for piano duet (two pianists at one piano) was composed between 1893-6 for the charming daughter of Emma Bardac (later to become Debussy's second wife). Little Dolly Bardac was to become the half-sister of Debussy's own daughter Chou-Chou (for whom Debussy composed his Children's Corner Suite). All the movements have an easy charm which one never tires of. They were later orchestrated by Henri Rabaud. The Mi-a-ou movement (named after the household kitten) is rhythmic and humorous.

@411  It is easy to underestimate the compositions of Gabriel Fauré  (1845-1924) for piano. They have a sort of aristocratic reserve, and like fine wines need time to fully savor and appreciate them. As well, many of them  have such similar character that they can sound repetitive. Nevertheless, Fauré's music displays impeccable craftsmanship, technical finish and  individuality. The Dolly Suite, Opus 56, for piano duet (two pianists at one piano) was composed between 1893-6 for the charming daughter of Emma Bardac (later to become Debussy's second wife). Little Dolly Bardac was to become the half-sister of Debussy's own daughter Chou-Chou (for whom Debussy composed his Children's Corner Suite). All the movements have an easy charm which one never tires of. They were later orchestrated by Henri Rabaud. Le jardin de Dolly (Dolly's garden) portrays the young girl's grace and innocence.

@412  It is easy to underestimate the compositions of Gabriel Fauré  (1845-1924) for piano. They have a sort of aristocratic reserve, and like fine wines need time to fully savor and appreciate them. As well, many of them  have such similar character that they can sound repetitive. Nevertheless, Fauré's music displays impeccable craftsmanship, technical finish and  individuality. The Dolly Suite, Opus 56, for piano duet (two pianists at one piano) was composed between 1893-6 for the charming daughter of Emma Bardac (later to become Debussy's second wife). Little Dolly Bardac was to become the half-sister of Debussy's own daughter Chou-Chou (for whom Debussy composed his Children's Corner Suite). All the movements have an easy charm which one never tires of. They were later orchestrated by Henri Rabaud. As one can tell from the Kitty-Valse movement, Mi-a-ou the kitten was a popular pet with little Dolly.

@413  It is easy to underestimate the compositions of Gabriel Fauré  (1845-1924) for piano. They have a sort of aristocratic reserve, and like fine wines need time to fully savor and appreciate them. As well, many of them  have such similar character that they can sound repetitive. Nevertheless, Fauré's music displays impeccable craftsmanship, technical finish and  individuality. The Dolly Suite, Opus 56, for piano duet (two pianists at one piano) was composed between 1893-6 for the charming daughter of Emma Bardac (later to become Debussy's second wife). Little Dolly Bardac was to become the half-sister of Debussy's own daughter Chou-Chou (for whom Debussy composed his Children's Corner Suite). All the movements have an easy charm which one never tires of. They were later orchestrated by Henri Rabaud.

@414  It is easy to underestimate the compositions of Gabriel Fauré  (1845-1924) for piano. They have a sort of aristocratic reserve, and like fine wines need time to fully savor and appreciate them. As well, many of them  have such similar character that they can sound repetitive. Nevertheless, Fauré's music displays impeccable craftsmanship, technical finish and  individuality. The Dolly Suite, Opus 56, for piano duet (two pianists at one piano) was composed between 1893-6 for the charming daughter of Emma Bardac (later to become Debussy's second wife). Little Dolly Bardac was to become the half-sister of Debussy's own daughter Chou-Chou (for whom Debussy composed his Children's Corner Suite). All the movements have an easy charm which one never tires of. They were later orchestrated by Henri Rabaud. This Spanish dance sparkles with rhythm and brilliant clarity. Fauré imagines Dolly dancing in Spanish costume, accompanying herself on a tambourine.

@415 The Lieder ohne Worte (Songs without Words) continued Schubert's tradition of writing short, lyrical pieces for the piano. Melodic or lyric style is combined with harmonic, instrumental style. Felix Mendelssohn (1809-1847) wrote a total of 48 Songs without Words, published in sets of six. The first edition, published in London, had the title Original Melodies for the Pianoforte. The second edition appeared as Songs without Words. Most of the pieces have characteristic titles, but except for a few, were all added by editors and pianists (promotional gimmicks existed even in the 19th century). Although he never publicly protested the titles, his personal letters indicate that he never approved of these "poetic appendages". Rather than trying to capture the spirit of something specific, they are glimpses of more fundamental emotional and musical feelings.  The Song without Words in A, Op. 38, No. 4 opens and closes with a flourish of gentle arpeggios. It mainly consists of simple chord writing.
