@072 Take the "A" Train (Chris Sigerson version), written by Billy Strayhorn, is Duke Ellington's well known theme song.  Duke's intro and ending are almost always played. The medium-up tempo solo treatment features a left hand walking bass throughout with the melody and solo work played in right hand chordal style. The D9(b5) in the 3rd bar seems to be a focal point where musicians often showcase their prowess on the whole tone scale. "A" Train has always been a favorite jam session vehicle. Key of Fm. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Billy Strayhorn.

@073 Angel Eyes, was written by Earl Brent and Matt Dennis. This medium-tempo solo piano arrangement begins with a 4 bar modal intro on Fm. Note the unexpected reharmonization in bars 16 and 17.  The regular chords ( Fm7 , Bb7  ) are replaced by  Bbm7  Ebm7  , Abm7 Db7 .  Key of Fm. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Bill Evans.

@074 Blues in Bb, written by Chris Sigerson,  is a study of  voicings and reharmonization based on the basic blues progression. This piece demonstrates voice leading, whole tone descending #9 chords, tri-tone substitution, stacked voicings, walking bass and locked hands approaches. Note that in most cases throughout the Jazz Pianist, the chord display has been kept simple. A bar of G7 might have many passing chords and alterations which are often not indicated. This gives a better understanding of how the pianist works with (and adds to) simple concepts.  Key of Bb. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Chris Sigerson.

@075 Gentle Rain was written by Louis Bonfa, the great Brazilian guitarist. This solo Bossa version begins with an 8 bar Am7, D/A  modal intro. Bar 18 has an  F triad over a B7 which produces a B7(#5)(b9).  Key of Am. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Hank Jones.

@076 Hey There was written by Adler and Ross.  In this beautiful ballad, the main theme is repeated up a major third in the second 8 bar phrase. Notice the C7 Alt chord notation in bar 1. "Alt"  is an abbreviation which indicates that the 5th and 9th are to be altered (e.g. C7#5b9 or C7b5#9) and that the altered dominant scale can be applied.   Key of Eb. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of: Bill Evans.

@077 How About You, was written by Freed and Lane. This solo performance begins with an intro style which Bill Evans  was fond of playing:   F6  Abdim, Gm7  C7,  over a pedal  C. In the second chorus there is some Dave McKenna, Dick Hyman type walking bass with the right hand soloing chord in chord style. Key of F. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Dick Hyman.

@078 In a Sentimental Mood,  written by Duke Ellington, is one of the most beautiful stand-alone melodies in the jazz repertoire and this smooth rendition certainly captures the mood very well. The A section is in Dm and the bridge goes to the key of Db, the flat 6 of the relative major (F). This was one of Duke's favorite bridge modulations. The  Key of Dm. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Duke Ellington.

@079 Like Someone in Love, written by Johnny Burke and Jimmy Van Heusen,  features a descending bass line for the first 5 bars of the tune. At bar 64, notice the diminished scale, harmonized in thirds. This was a favorite technique of Bill Evans. Key of Ab. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Bill Evans.

@080 Polka Dots and Moonbeams, written by Johnny Burke and Jimmy Van Heusen,  has been a favorite ballad vehicle for many years. This begins with a 4 bar intro in the Bill Evans style (F6 Abdim, Gm7  C7, over a C pedal.) Note: in bar 6,  Bm7 - E7 is substituted for C7. In bar 9, Bm7b5 is used instead of Dm7. Solo version  Key of F. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Chris Sigerson.

@081 I Said It Before was written by Oliver Gannon. This trio version begins with a quick II - V into Cm7. The bridge has descending 7th chords. Rather than playing on each chord individually, a good approach is to play a funky, bluesy style over this as opposed to following each chord chromatically down.  Key of Eb. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of: Monty Alexander.

@082 I Left My Heart in San Francisco was written by Douglas Cross and George Cory. This huge hit for Tony Bennett in the 60's begins with the equally well-known verse. It is performed here in a relaxed jazz-cocktail style. Incidentally, check out Tony Bennett on a couple of duo albums he did with Bill Evans. Note the use of Sus4 chords throughout.  Key of Bb. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of: Tommy Flannagan .

@083 So Nice was written by Oliver Gannon. This trio version is based on the chord progression for a well known standard. At bar 105 a locked hands approach is used.  Key of Cm. Performed by: Chris Sigerson. Picture of:  Herbie Hancock.

@084 Someday My Prince Will Come was written by Larry Morley and Frank Churchill. This well-known Disney classic in 3/4 time was transformed into a jazz standard by the likes of Bill Evans and Miles Davis. The intro features a 8 bar pedal on an F7sus4 chord. This version is in the style of Bill Evans.  Key of Bb. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Bill Evans.

@085 Squeeze Me, was written by Williams, Waller and Duke Ellington. In this solo version, the left hand provides the rhythm, whereas the right hand plays the melody and the solo work in chordal style. Also note the "Basie" ending.  Key of C. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of: Duke Ellington.

@086 Night Breeze was written by Oliver Gannon. This is a trio rendition of a tune based on a well-known standard chord progression. Points of interest are: the Lydian concept, stacked chords and left-hand voicings which incorporate a lot of half steps. There is a fairly strong Bill Evans influence throughout. Key of C. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of:  Bill Evans.

@087 What Are You Doing the Rest of Your Life, was written by Michel LeGrande. This tune, which was a hit in the 60's,  features a descending minor line which continues for about 8 bars. LeGrande's tunes are characterized by a strong melodic motif development. Notice in the bridge, the motif is simply transposed chromatically. Key of Am. Performed by: Chris Sigerson.  Picture of: Chris Sigerson.

@088 My One and Only Love was written by Robert Mellin and Guy Wood.  This relaxed rendition incorporates a descending scalar line. Note that the first bar of the bridge uses a 1 - 6 - 2 - 5 progression in a minor key (Em C#m7b5, F#m7b5 B7b9). Notice the fast diatonic chordal run at the end  of the tune. Key of C. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Herbie Hancock.

@089 Don't Get Around Much Anymore was written by Bob Russell and Duke Ellington. This tune is characterized by a single-line statement, followed by a chordal answer. It's performed solo at a slightly faster than normal tempo. It was a big hit for Ellington. In the bridge a Dave McKenna walking bass is used.  Key of C. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Duke Ellington.

@090 Easy Living was written by Robin and Rainger. Here is a trio rendition of the tune which was very much associated with Billie Holiday. It is performed here in the easy style of Hank Jones or Tommy Flannagan. Bar 31 features a turnaround which goes from F6 to Ab7 to Db9 to Gb7 and then back to F6.  Key of F. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Hank Jones.

@091 I Let a Song Go out of My Heart, is another great classic written by Duke Ellington. The bridge modulates from Eb to B, a modulation to the key of the flat 6th which Duke often incorporated for his bridges.  Key of Eb. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of: Monty Alexander.

@092 I Got it Bad was written by Duke Ellington. In this solo version check out the voicings at bar 15 for the basic chords B7, E7, A7, D7. This rendition creates a dreamy atmosphere. Key of G. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Kenny Barron.

@093 It Don't Mean a Thing was written by Duke Ellington. This trio version begins with an 8 bar intro where a repeated bass figure sets up a nice groove. It also features a chromatic descending bass line.  Key of Gm. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Renee Rosnes.

@094 In a Mellowtone, written by Duke Ellington,  is presented here in a trio format. The tune is based on the chord progression for the older tune Rose Room which was a big favorite in the 30's.  Key of Ab. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Hank Jones.

@095 Mood Indigo was written by Mills, Bigard and Duke Ellington. This is a solo offering in a bluesy, stride style. This Ellington tune typically achieves great sophistication from a simple harmonic structure. Key of Bb. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Tommy Flannagan.

@096 There is No Greater Love was written by Marty Symes and Isham Jones. Part of this trio arrangement was borrowed from a McCoy Tyner concept. Notice the melody is mimicked in fugal style at the beginning. Bars 8 and 9 have a series of chromatic ascending chords.  Key of Bb. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of: McCoy Tyner .

@097 Polka Dots and Moonbeams (Accompaniment version), was written by Johnny Burke and Jimmy Van Heusen. This duo treatment is offered as a study in accompaniment techniques. You can set the melody instrument to that of your choice. Vibes (GS #12) seems to work very well for melody solo instruments in a jazz context. Notice how the piano accompaniment stays out of the way of the soloist.  Key of F. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of: Renee Rosnes .

@098 Satin Doll, written by Duke Ellington,  might be considered his most popular work. This trio version begins with Duke's famous intro for this tune (which is almost always played.) At bar 61 notice the quote of the intro. Also the concept of motif development is used throughout. Key of C. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of: Herbie Hancock.

@099 The Shadow of Your Smile, written by Johnny Mercer and Johnny Mandel, is played in a trio Bossa rendition. The intro features full chords punctuated by a motif in fourths. Notice the long vamp near the ending from Cm7 to F7 and the use of pentatonics and fourths.  Key of Cm. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Monty Alexander.

@100 Solitude (Accompaniment version) was written by Duke Ellington. Here is another good study of how to play in duo situations. Duke is said to have written this tune while waiting in line to get into a restaurant. The melody instrument sounds good on Vibes (GS #12) but any instrument may be used. Key of Db. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of: Tommy Flannagan.

@101 Sophisticated Lady, written by Duke Ellington,  is presented here in trio format. Notice at bar 35 the chromatic chords F#7, F7, E7 and Eb7 have been replaced by C7, F7, Bb7 and Eb7. At bar 50 it moves into a double time feel for the bridge. Key of Ab. Performed by: Renee Rosnes.  Picture of:  Renee Rosnes.

@102 After You've Gone was written by Creamer and Layton. This solo begins in a nice easy stride style and then at bar 22 goes into a double time, bebop Bud Powell mode. Key of Bb. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of:  Bud Powell.

@103 Take the A Train (Larry Fuller version) was written by Billy Strayhorn and Duke Ellington. This version features a lot of locked-hand technique in the Nat Cole, George Shearing tradition. Also notice at bar 67 and 83 the augmented descending triads in whole tones. Bar 127 uses the same technique, this time, ascending . Also notice the Charlie Parker lick in bar 81. Key of C. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: George Shearing .

@104 Autumn Leaves (Larry Fuller version) was written by Johnny Mercer and Joseph Cosma. This is a trio version of one of the most well-known and often performed tunes in jazz. It begins as a duo with bass until bar 25 when the drums enter. Notice the double octaves at bar 75 and on. These are played two octaves apart. Oscar Peterson, among others, is a master of this technique. Key of Gm. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: Oscar Peterson.

@105 Blues in C was written by Larry Fuller. This trio version of the blues features many of the stylistic elements of pianists such as Phineas Newborn and Bud Powell. The intro and ending use a series of descending whole-tone dominant 7ths. Note the double octaves at bar 70.   Key of C. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: Bud Powell .

@106 Cherokee was written by Ray Noble. The intro to this trio version hints at a native Indian motif and was originally played by Bud Powell. Points of interest are: locked-hand statement of melody and use of double octaves at bar 126.    Key of Bb. Performed by: Larry Fuller. Picture of:  Bud Powell .

@107 Frankie and Johnny is performed in a Dr. John blues style (with a little Ray Bryant thrown in.)  This old tune was one of the first pop blues. Notice the left-hand sticks to the basic Chicago blues pattern.   Key of C. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of:  Larry Fuller.

@108 Here' s That Rainy Day was written by Johnny Mercer and Jimmy Van Heusen. Here is a trio Bossa rendition of this great classic. Notice the descending bass line in this chord progression. The  8 bar intro shows how effective a little rhythmic arranging can be to set up a tune.  Key of . Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: Larry Fuller.

@109 I Let A Song Go Out of My Heart, written by Duke Ellington, is performed here solo style. The first 16 bars is played in a locked-hand fashion whereas the bridge is played in stride style. In bar 38 a little tag motif is added - a slight variation but very effective from the point of interest. Key of  C. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of:  Monty Alexander.

@110 Indiana (Back Home Again In) was written by B. MacDonald and J. Hanley.  This solo version begins with a rubato intro of the last 8 bars. Then at bar 11 the tune is played in tempo,  stride style.  Bars 17 & 18 feature a famous piano lick which is actually not as difficult as it sounds if two hands are used. Notice the interesting variation in harmony in bar 112. Key of F. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of:  Fats Waller.

@111 Laura (Larry Fuller version), written by David Raksin, opens with a solo rubato intro to bar 7. Note the use of the Coltrane changes at bar 9 and throughout. The regular Gmaj7 chord for 2 bars is replaced by Gmaj7 Bb7, Ebmaj7 F#7, Bmaj7 D7, Gmaj7. This sequence can be used as a substitute for  2 bars of a major chord. For more information, check out the "Coltrane Changes Lesson" in the Jazz Pianist version 1.  Key of C. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: Hank Jones.

@112 The Man I Love was written by George and Ira Gershwin. This duo version borrows the phrasing from a Kenny Barron arrangement. The bass and piano state the melody in octaves up to the turnarounds and the bridge. During the blowing choruses, at bar 73, the normal Fm7b5 is replaced by an F7 as a variation.  Key of Eb. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of:  Monty Alexander.

@113 Poor Butterfly was written by Golden and Hubbell.  This sentimental tune (which is over 75 years old) is played rubato for the first chorus and as a slow stride for the second chorus.  Note that the Abdim in bars 5 and 27 is used as a substitute for the Abmaj7 chord. The diminished chord  then always resolves to the Major 7 chord. This works well on a Major 7 chord when the melody is a 7 or 9.   Key of Ab.  Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: Dick Hyman.

@114 Prelude to a Kiss was written by Duke Ellington.  This is a dreamy solo rendition in the style of Hank Jones, Tommy Flannagan or Monty Alexander.   The ending, played in rubato tempo, features a very pleasing series of chords which modulate to the final cadence.  Key of C. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of:  Monty Alexander.

@115 Sophisticated Lady (Larry Fuller version) was written by Duke Ellington (who is said to have spent 2 weeks trying to figure out the 2 bars coming out of the bridge). In bar 3, the series of descending dominant 7th chords are each played as Sus4 chords with the 4 - 3 resolution.   Key of Ab. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: Kenny Barron.

@116 Spring is Here  (Larry Fuller version) was written by Rodgers and Hart. It is performed solo in 2 keys. The first chorus in Db is played rubato. At bar 33, in tempo, it modulates to Ab.  Mod Keys of Db  and Ab . Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: Larry Fuller .

@117 Squeeze Me (Larry Fuller version), written by Duke Ellington,  is played here in a solo version which uses the following techniques; locked-hands  (in combination with bass note punctuation),  stride and Dave McKenna bass lines. "Locked-hands" refers to a technique where the melody is harmonized in close position (or drop-2 position) and the melody is doubled by the left hand an octave below. Two well-known exponents of this technique are Nat Cole and George Shearing. Key of G. Performed by: Larry Fuller.  Picture of: Nat Cole . 

@118 Santa Marta was written by Oliver Gannon. It is presented here as a demonstration of solo jazz-samba technique. Notice how the left hand maintains the pulse with half notes while the right hand plays the melody and fills. This creates the samba feel. There are several examples of left and right hand contrary motion (such as bar 11).  Key of F. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of: Fred Hersch.

@119 All of Me, written by Simons and Marks, is played here in a relaxed medium-up tempo stride. This old tune has always been a good blowing tune. Two recorded performances which stand out are Count Basie's and Monty Alexander's. Here the style is more like Hank Jones or Dick Hyman. Note how the stride feel is often broken up very effectively. Key of C. Performed by: Miles Black.  Picture of:  Hank Jones.

@120 Jay's Blues was written by Oliver Gannon.  This solo Bb blues is arranged  in "shot" style (i.e. melody followed by a shot etc.). In the blowing choruses the left hand provides a constant walking bass in the Dave McKenna, Monty Alexander style. Key of Bb. Performed by: Miles Black.  Picture of: Monty Alexander.

@121 Brooklyn was written by Oliver Gannon. This 16 bar tune is given a "Monk-solo-piano-style" treatment. Monk's playing was always inventive, deliberate, thoughtful, poignant and humorous. He always stuck to his musical idea and worked it out. He was a master of motif development. Some points of interest here are:  contrary motion bars 3, 15 and 16; whole-tone scale at bars 15 and 16; whole-tone scale  played Monk-style at the end of bar 16; minor and major 2nds in the lead.  Key of C. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Thelonius Monk.

@122 Cherokee (Miles Black version), written by Ray Noble,  is given an up-tempo solo treatment here.  The style is reminiscent of the amazing Bud Powell's solo bebop approach.  Notice the interesting rhythmic devices (left hand Vs right hand) in bars 191 - 196 and 209 - 213. Key of Bb. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Bud Powell.

@123 Don't Blame Me was written by Fields and McHugh. Here is a solo rendition in a relaxed ballad tempo. It is played in a style not unlike that of Hank Jones or Tommy Flannagan. Notice at bar 27 the normal Cmaj7 chord is replaced by  F#7 moving to  Fm7 . Some other devices to look for are: altered dom. 7ths, drop 2 voicings and diminished scales. The ending is borrowed from Fats Waller.  Key of C. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Fats Waller.

@124 How About You (Miles Black version),  is performed in a solo medium-stride style reminiscent of Dave McKenna or Dick Hyman. Key of Eb. Performed by:  Miles Black. Picture of:  Dick Hyman.

@125 I'll Remember April was written by Johnson, Raye and De Paul. This solo version is performed as a tribute to (and a partial study of) the well known Errol Garner style. One of the main features is the 4-to-a-bar guitar-like voicings in the left hand. Notice that many of the chords are inverted tenths with the 5th in the bass.   Key of G. Performed by:  Miles Black. Picture of:  Miles Black.

@126 I'm Walkin', written by Bartholomew,  is played as a solo with walking bass throughout.  A big hit for Fats Domino in the 50's, this piece would be an excellent study of walking bass. Some great exponents of this style are Dave McKenna, Oscar Peterson and Monty Alexander.  Key of F. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Monty Alexander.

@127 The Look of Love was written by Sammy Cahn and Jimmy Van Heusen. This tune, a big hit for Dusty Springfield in the early 60's, is performed with a smooth and implied left hand Bossa feel. Notice the 2/4 bar at bar 26.   Key of Dm. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Miles Black.

@128 There Will Never Be Another You, written by Harry Warren and Mack Gordon,  is performed in a solo style which features locked-hands for the first chorus and walking bass for the blowing section. Notice in bar 16,  Em7  A7 is used as a tri-tone substitution for Eb7. "Locked-hands" refers to a technique where the melody is harmonized in close position (or drop- 2 position) and the melody is doubled by the left hand an octave below. Two well-known exponents of this technique are Nat Cole and George Shearing.  Key of Eb. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of: George Shearing.

@129 New York, New York, is played  solo with a slow bluesy Bay Bryant feel. It begins with the well known intro harmonized with parallel tension chords. The left hand features walking bass throughout with some Errol Garner 4-to-the-bar played later on. The melody and solo work are harmonized with the right hand. Key of Bb. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Monty Alexander.

@130 Once In a While is played in a solo style which borrows some of the stylistic elements of Art Tatum and Hank Jones. Played in an easy jazz-cocktail style. Notice the Nat Cole intro and ending. Key of Eb. Performed by: Miles Black.  Picture of:  Art Tatum.

@131 Search was written by Oliver Gannon.  Here is a solo rendition of a tune which uses extended chords and a sparse melody to create an impressionistic mood. Note the implied time and use of space throughout. New York pianist Fred Hersch has used many of these elements in his playing.  Key of F. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Fred Hersch.

@132 Stella By Starlight was written by Victor Young and Ned Washington. This solo is played as a medium swing solo, in time but with a loose feel. Notice the effective use of space and light and shade in the touch. Exponents of this style are Bill Evans, Fred Hersch, Keith Jarrett and Herbie Hancock. Key of Bb. Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Fred Hersch.

@133 Wave was written by Antonio Carlos Jobim.   This solo performance begins with an 8 bar intro which sets up a spacey mood. This is an impressionistic interpretation melodically, harmonically and rhythmically. Herbie Hancock brought these elements to his music in his early days with Miles Davis (check out his playing on "My Funny Valentine" ). More recently, Fred Hersch incorporates neo classical approaches in his jazz playing.  Key of D. Performed by: Miles Black.  Picture of:  Antonio Carlos Jobim.

@134 The Way We Were was written by Marvin Hamlish and was sung by Barbra Streisand in the movie of the same name. This is a thoughtful, introspective solo version. Notice the voicings in 4ths in the second bar.  Key of . Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of:  Miles Black .

@135 Autumn Leaves (Ron Johnston duo version) was written by Mercer and Cosma.  This is performed as a duo, almost in conversational style,  to illustrate the role of the accompanist working with a solo instrument. Any melody instrument can be used -- vibes seems to work very well.  Key of Gm. Performed by: Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Ron Johnston.

@136 But Beautiful was  written by Jimmy Van Heusen. This ballad is performed in a solo style which makes use of tenths in the left hand.  If you can reach tenths and occasionally put a 5th or 7th in between, a very full sound can be achieved.  At bar 68, notice the use of a "deceptive cadence" : Ebmaj7+  is played instead of the expected G6 .Key of G. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Dick Hyman.

@137 A Child is Born was written by Thad Jones. This tune is apparently based on a theme that pianist Roland Hanna used to play as a warm up while musicians unpacked their instruments for the Monday night big band sessions at the Village Vanguard. This is a solo version of one of the most often played jazz waltzes.  Notice the surprise reharmonization at bars 26 and 27: The normal  D7 , Gm7   is replaced by  Ab Gb Emaj7, Gma7   .  Key of Bb. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Tommy Flannagan.

@138 Ebb Tide (2 versions) was written by Sigman and Maxwell. Here are 2 different approaches to this 50's pop hit. Each are played in C and Ab. The first approach is played in straight eighths, arpeggio style. This is a more pop approach than the second version  which is played as a  jazz swing in the Bill Evans style. Note that the notation screen will default to
straight eighths display. If you are printing out the jazz version, which begins at bar 72, you can change the display to 8th note triplets.  Keys of C and Ab. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of: Bill Evans.

@139 Emily was written by Johnny Mandel.  This well known  standard is played as a swing jazz waltz at a medium tempo. Notice in bars 116 to 120 how the dominant 7 b5 chords are used effectively.  Key of C. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of: Fred Hersch.

@140 Falling For You was written by Oliver Gannon. Here is an example of a solo pop tune approach. This tune uses a repeated note motif. In the jazz world,  Egberto Gismonte and Keith Jarrett have used this concept very effectively. The rhythm is stated throughout in arpeggio fashion. The form of this tune is A,A,B,C. (Most standard tunes are typically A,A,B,A). In the second chorus the melody instrument (vibes) enters to play a solo. Key of C. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Keith Jarrett.

@141 Green Dolphin Street, written by Washington and Kaper,  is performed as a hard swingin' piano solo in two keys, C and Eb. Hints of Bill Evans, Monty Alexander and Oscar Peterson can be heard in this rendition.  Keys of C and Eb. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Oscar Peterson.

@142 I Should Care (Ron Johnston version) was  written by Cahn, Stordahl and Weston.  This piano solo begins with a chorus in Rubato tempo after which it moves to a medium tempo. The first chord is traditionally a Dm7, however an F#m7b5 is often substituted and sometimes, as in this case, an F#9#11 is played.   Key of C. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Bill Evans.

@143 Imagination was written by Johnny Burke and Jimmy Van Heusen. It is played here in a solo jazz cocktail style.  Notice in bar 18, the first bar of the bridge, the Bbm7 on the 4th beat makes a nice passing chord -- logical and effective.  Coming out of the 2nd bridge, the modulation to the key of F in bar 60 is a pleasant surprise. Key of Eb. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Hank Jones.

@144 Laura (Ron Johnston version) was written by David Raksin. This tune, normally a ballad, is given a solo medium-up tempo treatment here in the style of Bill Evans or Kenny Barron.  It begins in the key of G  and ends in C. Key of C. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Bill Evans.

@145 Here's That Rainy Day (Ron Johnston version) was written by Jimmy Van Heusen. Here is a medium tempo solo version played in the Bill Evans tradition. Notice at bars 85 and 86 the rhythmic descending voicings. At bar 87, when contrary motion is introduced, it is truly a glorious passage.   Key of F. Performed by: Ron Johnston.  Picture of: Bill Evans.

@146 Spring is Here (Ron Johnston version) was written by Rodgers and Hart.  Bill Evans was one of the first to reharmonize this tune as you hear it here. Check out the contrary motion chords at bars 10 & 11  and also 14 & 15.  Key of Ab. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Ron Johnston.

@147 Then Came September was written by Oliver Gannon.   This solo jazz waltz is played rubato to bar 24. Played in the Bill Evans or Fred Hersch tradition, it moves through quite a few tonal centers. Listen at bars 76 to 83 for the triplets in groups of  4.  Key of C. Performed by: Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Fred Hersch.

@148 Triste was  written by Antonio Carlos Jobim who contributed so many great tunes to the jazz standards repertoire. Musicians always enjoy playing a Jobim Bossa. This solo Bossa version begins with a Latin Montuna-type vamp. The left hand is very hip time-wise. Jobim, who died in 1994, was a beloved and prolific composer.  Key of Bb. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Antonio Carlos Jobim.

@149 Warm was written by Oliver Gannon. The chords for this 64 bar tune are based on the harmony for the well known standard "Body and Soul" although they incorporate some of the "Coltrane changes" concepts. The A section is in the key of Db and the bridge is in D and C.  Key of Db. Performed by:  Ron Johnston.  Picture of:  Ron Johnston.

@150 Sweet Georgia Brown was written by Bernie and Pinkard in 1925. This version, performed by jazz pianist Lou Stein, illustrates several styles of jazz playing.  Following an eight bar introduction, the melody is played using intervals, blues notes, and "crush" notes.  The first jazz chorus illustrates the use of the single line so common in jazz improvisation.  In the following chorus, Lou really digs in by playing a funky rhythm solo; check out the right hand's upper line. This leads into a stride piano chorus, which features the signature interval jumps in the left hand. Finally, Lou takes us back to the melody (with a little funk thrown in) and closes with an extended ending.  This performance is a typical one for Lou:  funky, melodic, and rhythmic; in short, eclectic.  Those interested in obtaining other jazz piano arrangements by Lou or hearing his recordings are encouraged to contact him at the addresses provided in the Bio. section.   Key of  Ab. Performed by:  Lou Stein.  Picture of:  Lou Stein.

@
