@012 Charles, Ray\ Charles Ray (1930-) Born Ray Charles Robinson, his last name was dropped to avoid confusion with a boxing champ of the time of the same name.  Born in Albnay , GA in 1930, Ray was one of two children.  His interest in music started to become apparent around the age of three and he frequently sang at the local Baptist Church  in Greenville Fl., where his family had moved to when he was a baby.  Ray was partially blind by the age of 5 and totally blind by age 7,  possibly as a result of glaucoma.  Ray attend the state school for Deaf and Blind Children as a charity case as his family could ill afford to send him.  There, he was taught classical piano and the clarinet.  While at school, Ray developed a great affinity for math and discovered that this could be applied to music.  Ray developed a way to compose parts in his head part by part and could relay  them out loud  one by one.  Ray stayed in the school until his mother's death, after which he went on the road as a traveling musician. While his road to success was a hard, long trail,  he hung around the musician's union in Florida, picking up gigs where he could.  He billed himself as a solo act, often imitating a style of music made famous by the late Nat King Cole.  After several months of this, Ray asked a friend what the furthest point from Florida on the map was, and consequently ended up in Seattle, where things started to turn around for him.  While rapidly gaining local prominence in Washington state, he took a young musician by the name of Quincey Jones under his wing and a highly successful musical partnership emerged that continues to this day.  In Seattle, Ray formed one of the first all-black groups to get a TV sponsorship with his band, McSon Trio (1948).  From Seattle he went to Los Angles where he would cut his first album.  Along the way, Ray encountered firsthand the racial injustices prevalent in the U.S. at that time.  For example, in a concert in Augusta, GA the promoter insisted that the whites were seated downstairs and the blacks had to remain upstairs, while Ray was supposed to perform downstairs.  When Ray suggested that since he was black it was all the black folk that should be downstairs and refused to play until it was so,  he was sued and ordered to pay compensation.  This experience motivated him to  fight for racial justice which lead to a great friendship with  Martin Luther King Jr., along with moral and financial support.  By the early 60's  Ray had realized his dream of becoming a famous musician with hit records such as "Hit The Road Jack", "Georgia", "Born To Lose" and "What'd I say".  These and other hits led him to his first big European tour, where from 1960 until the present, he hasn't missed a single tour  except in 1965.  Ray can be credited as being one of the few musicians able to 'cross over' many forms (and races) of American Music; R&B, Jazz, Country, and Blues, while bringing various genres (and people) together to form a widely accepted popular music.  Among his accomplishments it must also be noted that Ray was 'instrumental' in the evolution of Rock and Roll.  To this day Ray has been a presence in Blues, Jazz, R&B, and Gospel music, and as such, must be a great influence to all aspiring Blues Pianists.  Even when he was young and in hard times "...I knew being blind was suddenly an aid.  I never learned to stop at the skin.  If I looked at a person, I wanted to see the inside.  Being distracted by shading or coloring is stupid.  It's something I just can't see."

@013 Milburn, Amos\ Milburn Amos (1927-1980) Little has been written about Amos Milburn save that he was the main influence of many aspiring piano players, including Fats Domino.  He was born in Houston TX on April 1st, 1930.  Amos learned to play the piano at the ripe old age of 5 and buy age 16 had dropped out of school to serve in the U.S. Navy.  While in the Navy he was a member of the "Pacific Theater of Operations", in which he performed for the troops at local camp shows from 1942-45.  After that, Amos went back to Houston and formed a sextet which found work in small clubs in the area.  Between 1946 and 1949 , Amos worked in clubs as a solo act in TX, LA, and CA.  In 1949, he recorded on the Aladdin label.  By  the 50's he moved north to the New York area, where he played in many clubs as well as small festivals such as The Harlem Variety Review,  Showtime at The Apollo Theater and the Harlem Jazz Festival.  Amos continued to work in the festival and club scene as well as recording on several labels until his death on Jan 3rd 1980.  Amos was quoted by some as having a "warm voice, a robust piano in melodious boogie-woogies, and a slow blues that were among his most memorable performances."

@014 Morton, Jelly Roll\Ferdinand Joseph La Menthe "Jelly Roll" Morton was born in Gulfport Louisiana, September 20, 1885.. He was one of the first great American pianists and arrangers and perhaps the first formal Jazz  theorist in the U.S.  The noted composer and Jazz historian Gunther Schuller, in his book "Early Jazz" says about Morton that "His best arrangements were not mere orchestrations, but carefully organized structures in which all the details of instrumentation, of timbre relationship, of rhythmic and harmonic counterpoint were realized as integral compositional elements." 
There is little doubt that Morton was a great improviser who used all such devices in his solo piano playing. He was also considered by many to be pompous and egotistical --as exemplified by his claim that he "Invented Jazz in 1905".  In the twenties , with his recording of "Red Hot Peppers", he produced arguably some of the best New Orleans style music ever captured on vinyl.  Morton learned his craft as a Ragtime pianist in the New Orleans bordellos and the Storyville Mansions, where he would play accompaniment for singers, dancers and sometimes he would even get to play alone just to listening to! His piano style tended to be orchestral and he was one of the first true arrangers of Jazz  Music.  He was also a noted Pool Shark, Vaudeville Comic and Nightclub Owner.  Because of his Creole heritage and arrogant attitude, it has been reported that he always felt separated from his fellow (Black) Jazz colleagues.  It has been said that Duke Ellington had a personal dislike both for him personally, and his abilities as a musician.  Some of his compositions have nevertheless become classics; King Porter Stomp, Kansas City Stomp, Wolverine Blues, Jelly Roll Blues, Muddy Water Blues, and Tiger Rag are all 'standards' today.  Some younger musicians of the thirties reportedly used to taunt him into bragging about how he invented Jazz, while laughing at his arrogance behind his back. Morton's dislike of the 'rough' playing of "Black Negroes" alienated him even further from  mainstream Jazz musicians and audiences, and no doubt contributing to his 'downfall'.  Shortly before his death, Morton was taped for endless hours in a month long interview with Alan Lomax, in which he discusses the details of early New Orleans music as a way of life, and plays extensive examples of this city's early musical beginnings.  These recordings, originally made for the Library of Congress, later to become the basis of Lomax's Morton biography entitled "Mister Jelly Roll" are now considered an invaluable contribution to an understanding of the history of Jazz.  Jelly Roll Morton died July 10, 1941. Discography: Immortal Jelly Roll Morton; Jelly Roll Morton, 1923-1924 - Milestone; Jelly Roll Morton, 1926-1927, Vol.3 - RCA France; Rare Piano Rolls, 1924-1926.

@015 Kaeshammer, Michael \ Kaeshammer, Michael (1977-) Born in Offenburg, Germany, Michael studied classical piano for six years, starting at the age of 7.  He was introduced to boogie-woogie piano at the age of 13 when his father brought home a recording by German pianist Vince Weber.  That event signaled the end of his classical studies, as Michael was immediately launched into a passionate study of boogie-woogie piano.  Learning the names of the composers from the Vince Weber record, he sought out recordings by Albert Ammons, Pete Johnson, Meade Lux Lewis, Big Maceo Merriweather, Pinetop Smith, Jimmy Yancey and Mary Lou Williams.  Countless hours of listening, copying and practicing brought him to his first club date in Offenburg at the age of 16. Concerts in Munich, Berlin and Freiburg followed, and led to appearances at the 1st and 2nd Honky Tonk Festivals in Leipzig.  Just before moving to Canada with his family in 1995, Michael entered and placed 3rd in Germany's prestigious national jazz competition.  He now lives in Victoria, B.C. where music reviewers have dubbed him the "boogie-woogie wunderkind".  His career has recently 'taken off' with club dates and festival appearances throughout British Columbia and the Pacific Northwest. 

@016 Lewis, Jerry Lee\Lewis, Jerry Lee (1935-)  Born September 29, 1935, Jerry grew up listening to a wide range of music.  At the age of 8 Jerry started to learn how to play the piano  on an instrument that his parents mortgaged their farm to buy.  It has been reported that he claims to have worked so hard to learn to play that he was playing well in two weeks.  He would spend hours behind the local tavern Hanley's Big House (he was too young to enter) listening to Blues players such as the 18 yr. old B.B. King, and dreaming of the day he might have a chance to perform.  Lewis borrowed from various forms of music (i.e. Blues R&B Gospel) and created his own trademark style, along with his cousins Mickey Gilly and Jimmy Lee Swaggart (they would always practice around the piano.)  Being a self-proclaimed deeply religious person, Jerry attributes all his musical talent as 'God-given' stating "Other people, they practice and practice...these fingers on mine, they got brains in 'em.  You don't tell them what to do, they do it...God-given talent."  In 1956, Jerry went to Memphis after reading a success-story about Elvis in Country Roundup.  He went to see Sam Phillips at Sun Records which forever changed his life.  He recorded "Whole Lotta' Shakin' Goin' On" in  one take for Sam.  Then, on July 28 1957, Jerry performed this song on the Steve Allen Show, signifying his arrival on the scene.   The song was almost immediately  #1 on the upon its release (now in the same company as Elvis and Carl Perkins.)  Of course, Jerry's next release "Great Balls Of Fire" was received just as well.  To this day nobody else has ever had two consecutive hits in a row on the Pop, Country and  R&B charts simultaneously.  In 1958, Jerry broke all attendance records at The Paramount in NYC when he played a twelve day gig there.   Then, when he went to England in 1958, his career took an unexpected nose-dive:  Jerry then 23, had taken a 13 year old girl (and his second cousin) as his bride, in spite of every chance to avoid the situation.  He was pulverized by the British press and came home only to be greeted by the same hostility.  After being blacklisted from TV  and Radio airplay indefinitely, Jerry set out on a string of one-niters for around $250 per show, a considerably smaller sum than the $10,000 per night he received before the marriage scandal.  In 1961, his remake of Ray Charles' "What'd I Say" finally received some airplay and by the late 60's he was seemingly 'forgiven' by the media and subsequently brought out a string of #1 hits on the Country charts.  In response to the heavy personal criticism he has endured throughout most of his career, Jerry has stated that all he wants to be remembered for is his music and that  "As long as they give me a piano, I'll be out there".

@017 Patton, Charlie\ Patton, Charlie (1891-1934) Known as the one of the founding Fathers of The Blues, Patton was born in Edwards, Mississippi into a family of 12 children.  In his childhood, Patton worked on various farms while learning to play the guitar from laborers and an "old man who played mostly chords".  Working at local parties and dances, he started working with such Blues legends as Willie Brown and Tommy Johnson.  By 1923, Patton and Johnson were performing at local bars in the Greenwood area as well as playing on street corners and at logging camps.  In 1929, Patton recorded for the Paramount label in Richmond, Indiana.  In 1930 he moved to Holly Ridge, Mississippi and played at dances, juke joints, and parties in the Blyle, Cleveland, and Leyland areas in and around the Mississippi  Delta region.  Between 1931 and 1934 he recorded for the Volcation Label in N.Y.  Patton died in 1934 on April 28th and was buried in an unmarked grave in Holy Ridge Mississippi.  A suitable marker was finally erected at his grave site in 1991.

@018 Johnson, Robert\ Johnson, Robert (1911-1938)  Perhaps best known as "The King of The Blues" Robert Johnson was born in Hazelhurst Mississippi on May 8th.  While he was a child he spent most of his time working on plantations with his family who were poor sharecroppers.  He left school by the age of 16 and subsequently ran away from home.  During this time he learned to play the harmonica and guitar while hanging around bars and juke joints.  It is there that he would meet such people as Charlie Patton and Son House, who would later have an enormous impact on his life as Son House taught him to play the guitar.  Although his peers were not very impressed with Johnson's playing, when he returned a few years later to see Patton and Son House they were amazed with his ability.  It is  this transformation  that conceived of the rumor  of Johnson going to the Crossroads to cut a deal with the Devil.  During the 30's, Johnson worked with the likes of Son House, Willie Brown, and Johnny Shines.  It is also during this time that he hoboed from town to town, working one-niters at bars, lumber camps, parties, speakeasies and just about any  other place he was welcome.  Johnson also reportedly set up across the street from other musicians, effectively stealing their audience.  Some time in 1936, Johnson recorded "Kind Hearted Woman" at H.C. Spires' music store.  This would be the first of only thirty songs (of fifty takes) he recorded.   From 1936 until 1937, Johnson appeared with Johnny Shines on a Detroit radio show and in 1937 he also worked frequently with Sonny Boy Williamson (Alex Miller), Howlin' Wolf, and Elmore James in juke joints in the Moorehead, Greenwood/Mississippi area.  A music store owner by the name of H.C. Spires told a friend at Columbia Records about Johnson, who later  contacted Johnson and set up a recording session.  Johnson was brought to San Antonio to the Gunter Hotel where the first session was recorded.  The second session was recorded in Dallas about seven months later reportedly in the records company warehouse: it is said that Johnson was paid somewhere between $75 and $100 for his songs.  After his death, Johnson's music faded into history until it was rediscovered in the sixties by people like Eric Clapton and Paul Butterfield, sparking a new era of Blues artists  The Hollywood movie "Crossroads" (W.B. 1981) popularized Johnson's life by basing a story around his legacy and his selling of his Soul to the Devil.  Robert Johnson was apparently known for being a ladies' man and reportedly angered many boyfriends and husbands with his antics.  He came to an untimely death on Aug. 16th, 1938 at the age of 27.  The details of his death remain uncertain, but it has been rumored that he died of poison, a gunshot wound, or  was fatally stabbed.  On his death certificate the cause of death section is blank, and  no doctor  is listed as being present..  Perhaps he didn't read the fine print on his contract with the Devil.

@019 Leon, T Gross aka Archibald\ Leon, T Gross aka Archibald (1912-1973) Born in New Orleans on Sept. 14 1912, Archibald became interested in music at a early age and learned piano as a child.  He worked at parties and fraternity houses in the new Orleans area during the thirty and forties.  In the early forties he was stationed on Bombay, India while he was in the U.S. Army.  After his tour of duty in the army he returned to the French Quarter of New Orleans and worked in the barrel houses and parties in the area.  In the 1950's, he recorded on the Imperial label.  He had a regular gig at the Poodle Patio Club in New Orleans and worked through the 60's at Nero's Club in Chicago IL.  Archibald was a major influence on many great piano players including Dr. John, James Booker, Huey Piano Smith, and Fats Domino.  Although his "Stack-O-Lee" was a top ten hit, he was much neglected and he left behind only this one album.  It has been said that years of alcohol abuse finally caught up with him, and he died in 1973 at the age of 61.

@020 Perkins, Pinetop Joe Willie\ Perkins, Pinetop Joe Willie (1913-) Pinetop was born in Belzoni, Mississippi on July 7 1913. When he was still quite young he and his family moved to the Paines-Deadman Plantation in Honey Island, Mississippi, where he was raised and learned to play the guitar, getting work at local parties and dances in the local community.  In 1923, he learned to play the piano and started playing at The Old Barrelhouse Honkeytonk in Honey Island in 1926.  He continually worked outside of the music industry but always played gigs at the local bars in the Indianola area of Mississippi during the late twenties and early thirties.  Between 1941 and 1943, he worked with Boyd Gilmore in local gambling houses in Vance, Mississippi.  After which he teamed with Robert Nighthawk and played on KFFA-radio in Helena, Arkansas.  This continued on into the mid forties with frequent tours all over the U.S.  During this time he also teamed up with Sonny Boy Williamson (Alex Miller) and did some recording with King Biscut Time which was broadcasted on KFFA-radio.  In the early to mid fifties he toured and recorded with the Earl hooker Band in Chicago IL and that is where he to work mostly outside of music.  He recorded again with the Earl Hooker Band in the early sixties.  In 1968, he replaced Otis Spann in the Muddy Waters Band and had frequent tours in to the seventies with this band. By this time, Pinetop had developed his own, unmistakable sound, His right hand played horn lines while his left played bass.  It was Pinetop, along with Pete Johnson, Meade Lux Lewis, Albert Ammons and Little Brother Montgomery, who provided the basic format and ideas from which countless swing bands derived their sound  Although Pinetop never performed swing, it was arguably his brand of boogie-woogie that eventually came to influence the structure of swing and, more recently, Rock 'n Roll.

@021 Chatman, Peter (Memphis Slim)\Chatman, Peter AKA Memphis Slim (1915-1988) One of two famous piano players that employed the same alias.  Born in Memphis TN Sept. 3, 1915, Slim always had a love for music, what with his father  a Deacon in the church and living beside the local Honky-Tonk.  He taught himself piano at the age of 7, and attended Lester High School, where he was taught to play the Upright Bass in the School Band.  He started professionally 'gigging' at the age of 16 in juke joints and in 1931 he left home to hobo through the south while working dance halls, juke joints and camps.  In 1937, he moved to Chicago and started to use the name Memphis Slim.  While there, he recorded with the Bluebird label in 1941,  playing live gigs in the Chicago area as well.  Throughout the forties and fifties, Slim worked and recorded in many places under many different labels.   In the fifties, he ended up working at the famous Storyville Club in Boston, Mass.  In the late fifties he was introduced to Willie Dixon, whom he subsequently recorded with on the Bluesville label (1958).  In 1959, Slim played Carnegie Hall in N.Y. as well as the Newport Jazz Festival.  He also went on tour with Willie Dixon in Europe for the next two years.  Except for major blues/jazz events in the U.S., Slim played mostly around France in his later years, and he eventually  officially moved to Europe, where he died in 1988, on Feb. 24th, of apparent kidney failure. 

@022 Davenport, Charles (M.Slim #2) \Davenport Charles Edward AKA, Memphis Slim (1894-1955) The second to use the alias Memphis Slim was Charles Davenport, born in Anniston, Alabama.  As his  father was a minister and his was mother a church organist, he naturally grew to love music, and had taught himself play the organ at a very early age.  Between 1910 and 1911 he attended the Alabama Theological Seminary: Selma University  in Alabama, where he was later expelled for ragging a march at a social function.  He worked in local bars, juke-joints, brothels, and parties in and around the Atlanta area until suddenly, in 1914, he joined the circus in a travailing troop with Barkoot's Traveling Carnival.  In 1917, he changed jobs once more and worked in the Storyville area of New Orleans as a pianist in the local brothels.  Later that year he got his first 'big break' by working with one of the First Ladies of the Blues, Bessie Smith, in various Vaudeville-type shows.  In the twenties, he worked with Haeg's Circus as a blackfaced singer/dancer/minstrel, as well as various other types of Vaudeville show business. This work carried him into 1922, when he became a member of the Lincoln Theater until 1924.  Slim also worked and recorded with Dora Carr through the early twenties, but by the mid-twenties he started touring Europe, performing in shows for European Royalty.  In 1927, Slim toured with Ivy Smith, forming the band Davenport & Smith's Chicago Steppers.  When the band broke up, he worked as a talent scout and a song writer for the Vocalion-Brunswick label.  In 1930 he left show business to work in a record shop which he owned in Cleveland, Ohio.  This semi-retirement was short-lived, however, as he was back on the road with his own band, the Cow Cow's of Chicago Steppers in  1933.  "Cow Cow" was another alias used by Charles Davenport.  It refers to the long, sweeping part on the front of a locomotive which were aptly called cow catchers.  He then ventured in to his own business again and found himself the owner of a cafe in Cleveland in 1935.  He didn't stop playing, however, and he recorded with Sam Price group and played on the radio between 1936 and 1938.  In 1939, he appeared on Art Hodes radio show on WNYC-radio in NYC.  He also played in juke joints, clubs, and casinos.  He died in his home in Cleveland, Ohio  on Dec 3rd, 1955 of hardening of the arteries.  

@023 Butler, Henry\ Butler, Henry (1948) Born in New Orleans in 1948 Butler, who was rendered completely blind by an infantile eye disease he contracted when he was two months old, was attracted to the piano as a young child. He began receiving formal musical training at the Louisiana State School for the Blind in Baton Rouge at age 8. Throughout his youth and adolescence he absorbed the piano styles of New Orleans R & B from Professor Longhair, James Booker, Tommy Ridgely and Eddie Bo as well as involvement in gospel accompaniment. He broadened his interest to include mainstream jazz while studying for his B. A. in voice at Southern University in Baton Rouge under the tutelage of clarinetist/composer/recording artist Alvin Batiste. Batiste introduced Butler to the jazz legacy of John Coltrane, Charlie Parker, Bud Powell and Art Tatum, but he also pointed him in the direction of music from folk cultures of Africa, the Caribbean and South America;  a music that 20 years later came to be called "world music." Butler became an active performer, playing his own multi-cultural mix of Jazz, New Orleans R & B and 'musics of the world'. He earned a Masters degree in Vocal music from Michigan State, and received grants from the National Endowment of the Arts to study with pianists Roland Hanna and George Duke, and with saxophonist Cannonball Adderly (he also studied privately with Harold Mabern.)  Finding himself back in New Orleans in 1974, he continued to absorb his hometown influences. From 1976 to '78 he taught at the New Orleans Center for the Creative Arts, the same arts high school which spawned the Marsalis brothers, Donald Harrison, Terrence Blanchard, and Harry Connick, Jr, to name but a few.  He also spent some time with Professor Longhair, learning Fess's idiosyncratic licks and tricks.  This influence added to the study of contemporary Jazz Pianists such as McCoy Tyner, Chick Corea and Keith Jarrett, as well as twentieth century composers such as Debussy and Bartòk, which  forged Butler's broad stylistic approach to the keyboard. It is an approach deeply rooted in a solid, propulsive, highly nuanced sense of rhythm, complete hand independence, solid mastery of jazz and blues idioms from the entire century's history of the genres, lightening fast technique, and excellent taste. Butler moved to Los Angeles in 1980 where he gigged in local restaurants, clubs and on the radio. He worked as a composer, arranger and actor on director Oz Scott's docudrama Dreamland and as a talent development consultant for Motown and the Stevie Wonder Organization.  After sitting-in with bassist Charlie Haden and drummer Billy Higgins at the Comeback Inn in Venice in 1984, however, he received an offer to record for MCA, resulting in his major release, Fivin' Around, which Billboard considered one of the top ten Jazz albums of 1986.  Butler moved to Brooklyn and gigged around New York from 1986 to 1990, and made his second CD for MCA, The Village, in 1987.  He signed with Windham Hill in 1989 and recorded a live CD at Tipitina's in New Orleans called Orleans Inspiration, which was released in 1990.  Also that same year, he began teaching music at Eastern Illinois University in Charleston, Illinois. Butler's fourth album, Blues and More, co-produced by George Winston on Windham Hill, is a combination of New Orleans style piano and sophisticated world-beat music. He considers it his best product and has recorded a second volume.

@024 Black, Miles\Miles Black was born in Port Alberni, BC on April 13, 1966. At 28 years of age, Miles Black has become one of Canada's leading jazz pianists and composers. Miles began his musical training at the age of 12 in Victoria, BC. Although he was raised on folk and rock 'n roll, it was the music of such greats as Keith Jarrett, Oscar Peterson and Bill Evans that spurred him towards a career in Jazz. In 1987 Miles moved to Vancouver and enjoyed respect and support from the local music community. In 1988 he joined Paul Horn's band and toured the Soviet Union, and in 1989 he became a member of the award-winning jazz-fusion recording group Skywalk for which he became a contributing composer. The Miles Black Trio was formed in 1991 and has a dynamic and refreshing repertoire of both traditional and contemporary jazz standards and originals. The trio is currently enjoying critical acclaim as well as airplay on the CBC. Miles has performed with Maynard Ferguson, "Slide" Hampton, Muhal Richard Abrams, Fraser MacPherson, PJ Perry, George Robert and Sweets Edison. Miles has gained prominent stature as a versatile instrumentalist and is much sought after as a leader, a sideman, and a session musician. He has played on a wide variety of records. He currently teaches at Capilano College. His accomplishments on saxophone, bass, and guitar, as well as piano lend depth to his arrangements and compositions. He has recently toured Canada with the Miles Black Quartet. Discography: Larger Than Life; Purple Phase; Spin Cycle.

@025 Monk, Thelonius\Thelonious Sphere Monk was born in North Carolina on October 10, 1918. He died on February 17, 1982. In the early 40's, Monk (along with Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker) was one of the original founders of the Bebop movement. Pianistically, he comes from the stride style of James P. Johnson and Duke Ellington. Whereas most of the bebop players were playing lines that had a melodic curve, Monk's lines had sharp angles.  His improvisation, spare and choppy, like his composing, was always provocative. Although he played in bands with Dizzy Gillespie and with Coleman Hawkins, most of Monk's work was as a soloist or as the leader of small groups, usually quartets, which featured such tenor players as Johnny Griffin, Charlie Rouse and John Coltrane.  As a composer, he contributed numerous pieces that are still standards in the Jazz repertoire.  Among them are "Round Midnight", "Ruby My Dear" "In Walked Bud", "Well You Needn't", "I Mean You", "Epistrophy" and "Straight No Chaser." Jazz Legend/Trumpeter/Bandleader Miles Davis once said of him; "Man, Monk taught me more about music than anyone else on 52nd Street".  In 1964 he made the cover of Time Magazine. In the late 50's, Monk performed with his quartet (usually featuring John Coltrane) for about two years at the Five Spot in New York City.  The club was always full, due in part to Monk's funny hats, dark glasses and his eccentric stage mannerisms (such as dancing trance-like in circles during Trane's solos). His harmonic manipulations stretched the boundaries of conventional jazz tonality. Monk could take an old standard like "Tea for Two" or "Just a Gigolo" and totally revitalize it by using his regular musical devices; re-harmonizing the chord structure, applying unusual intervals, dissonance, tri-tone substitutions and rhythmic displacement. Bill Evans wrote that Thelonius Monk is "...an exceptional uncorrupted creative talent. Make no mistake, this man knows exactly what he is doing in a theoretical way...We can be further grateful to him for combining aptitude, insight, drive, compassion, fantasy and whatever else makes the "total artist" ...in an age of insurmountable conformist pressures."  In the 70's, his appearances became more and more infrequent due to an illness which seemed to affect his mental state. He became more and more withdrawn until his death in 1982 with his wife Nellie at his side. A feature documentary "Straight, No Chaser" produced by Clint Eastwood and available in video stores is one of the best Hollywood treatments of Jazz to date. Discography: Complete Genius (1947-52); High Priest (1963-64); Pure Monk; In Person; The Riverside Trios; At The Five Spot; Thelonius Monk: The Complete Genius (1047 - 1952); Monk/Trane;

@026 Evans, Bill\William John Evans was born in Plainfield, N.J., August 16, 1929. After Bud Powell, Bill was the next major innovative and influential jazz pianist. His unique style, which has been adopted by countless pianists since, favored lush piano voicings, played with a sensitive, introspective touch. His improvisation tended to be lyrical and scale based (the left hand voicing often had a half-step interval buried in the middle of the chord. He joined the Miles Davis Sextet in 1959, replacing Red Garland but before the end of the year, owing to his spontaneous success with critics and public, he left Miles to form his own trio. Bill wanted the trio to "grow in the direction of simultaneous improvisation rather than one guy blowing followed by another guy blowing. If the bass player, for example, hears an idea that he wants to answer, why should he just keep playing 4/4 in the background? The men I'll work with have learned how to do the regular kind of playing and so I think we now have the license to change it. Especially, I want my work (and the trio's if possible) to sing." The trio's early records such as "The Village Vanguard Sessions", readily attest to the fact that Bill had realized his musical goal. Scott LaFaro was the perfect bass player for this type of lyrical and harmonic interplay, as was drummer Paul Motian. Bill liked to explore the more impressionistic aspects of the piano and this is exemplified on the album "Conversations with Myself" on which he overdubbed several tracks. He could dig deep into a tune and within himself, hypnotically leading the listener all the way. His solo rendition of "Never Let Me Go" is a particularly reflective and poignant performance which occupies an entire side of the record "Alone". He was the recipient of numerous awards, including five Grammys for the albums Conversations with Myself (1963), Live at Montreux (1968), Alone (1970), and The Bill Evans Album (1971). Discography: (In addition to the above); The Village Vanguard Sessions; Intuition; Montreux II; Peace Piece and Other Pieces; Kind of Blue; Undercurrent; New Conversations With Myself; The Tokyo Concert.  He died on September 15th, 1980. 

@027 Hancock, Herbie\Herbie Hancock was born in Chicago on April 12, 1940. Herbie was a child prodigy who started with the classical repertoire and performed with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra at the age of eleven. He learned jazz piano by listening to the records of George Shearing and Oscar Peterson, transcribing their solos note for note. After college, where he studied electrical engineering and music, his first gig was with trumpeter Donald Byrd. In 1962 Herbie's solo record debut, "Takin' Off", with Dexter Gordon and Freddie Hubbard premiered his first big hit, "Watermelon Man." He joined the Miles Davis Quintet, in 1963, with which he performed for five years. With this group, considered by many to be one of the best in the history of jazz, Herbie did some of his best playing, forming a tight musical bond with bassist Ron Carter and drummer Tony Williams. He has made many records with that rhythm section since then. Herbie also gained prominence as a composer with "Maiden Voyage", "Dolphin Dance", "The Sorcerer", "Eye of the Hurricane", "Speak Like a Child" and of course, "Watermellon Man" being his most well known tunes. In the 70's and 80's he got into the more electric side of things and recorded some very successful albums such as "Head Hunters", "Future Shock" (1983) and "Sound System" (1984). These albums featured electronic keyboards and a funk feel. Hancock's film scores include "Blow Up" (1969), "Death Wish" (1974), "A Soldier's Story" (1984), and "'Round Midnight" (1986). The 1977 album "V.S.O.P.:The Quintet" was an album which essentially reunited the old Miles band (with Freddie Hubbard instead of Miles) and many of Herbie's fans were glad to hear him play the acoustic piano again. In the 90's Herbie lives in California and continues to be very busy, playing with his trio or quartet and touring with jazz artists such as Wynton Marsalis and Pat Metheny. Discography: Maiden Voyage; Speak Like a Child; V.S.O.P.: The Quintet; Head Hunters. (With Miles) E.S.P.; Miles Smiles; My Funny Valentine.

@028 Kelly, Wynton\Wynton Kelly was born in Jamaica on December 2, 1931. He died in Toronto, Canada on April 12, 1971. Wynton's family moved to the U.S. when he was four years old. He played with Eddie Davis in the 40's. He accompanied Dinah Washington and played with Dizzy Gillespie before and after his military service from 1952 - '54. He formed his own trio in '58 and played with Miles Davis from '59 - '63 replacing pianist Red Garland. His playing always had a very natural, rhythmical groove and he excelled in his blues playing. Wynton had the ability to compose a seemingly endless stream of melodic ideas "on the fly" for chorus after chorus. He began to record under his own name in 1951 and his complete Blue Note sessions have been issued in Japan as "Piano Interpretations by Wynton Kelly". After he left Miles Davis he lead a trio with Paul Chambers and Jimmy Cobb. This trio regularly teamed up with Wes Montgomery, in fact most Wes fans would agree that this was one of the best formats for Wes' playing. "Undiluted, Smokin' at the Half Note" (with Wes) was one of his great albums in the 63' to 65' period, (try to obtain the original quartet version without the added strings, if possible, available on a Japanese release.) His trio rendition of Tad Dameron's "If You Could See Me Now" is a classic. Discography: "New Faces, New Sounds", Bluenote - 1951; "Piano Interpretations by Wynton Kelly"; "Kelly Blue '59"; "Kelly Great" and "Kelly at Midnight"; "Wynton Kelly"; "Undiluted, Smokin' at the Half Note"; "Blues on Purpose"; "Full View"; "In Concert".

@029 Penniman, Richard Wayne\ Penniman, Richard Wayne AKA Little Richard (1935-) Undoubtedly one of the most flamboyant talents to come out of Macon Georgia was Little Richard.  His loud style of key banging, voice shrieking mixtures of music and stage antics will be long-remembered.  By the time Richard was seven years old, he was singing and dancing on the street for tips.  When he was 8 he won a talent contest and was featured in his church choir.  He taught himself piano while he was a youth in church, hence the apparent Gospel influence in his music.  By the time he was 13, he had traveled with Dr. Hudson's Medicine Show and other,  working as a singer/dancer/pianist while simultaneously attempting to selling herb tonic.  In 1950 he won another talent contest in Atlanta, Georgia, and ended up recording for the Victor label later that same year.  Between '51 and '54, he played with several bands until he recorded with his own band on the Specialty label.  Between 1955 and 1957, Richard appeared in four movies "The Girl Can't Help It, Don't Knock The Rock, She's Got It, and Mister Rock And Roll".  During this time, he recorded Tutti Frutti and had a number ten hit with it.  Immediately afterwards, Pat Boone remake of the same song went all the way to number 1.  He left the music field for a period to attend University and subsequently earned a B.A. in Theology, which eventually lead to his becoming an ordained minister of the Seven Day Adventist Church in 1961.  In the early sixties, he recorded mostly religious music for 20th Century Fox.  Then, in 1962, he returned to his 'Rock and Roll roots' and played with both The Stones and the Beatles on various concert dates in England.  After his success with the British Invasion, he continued to write songs and appear on various TV shows such as The Monkees, American Bandstand, Midnight Special, The Smothers Brothers, Carson, etc.  During the mid-seventies, he left show business for a short time to serve as a minister.  Still performing today,  he adamantly insists that "I did it -- it's all mine!"
@

