@001 Nine Point Five Blues. This simple boogie illustrates how much mileage you can get out of a single short phrase, namely a three-note chromatic descent. The notes F-E-Eb, or 8 (1) -7 - b7, have a special poignancy about them, like a call into the distance. The head melody sequences them up to the IV chord for the middle four measures of the form, then offers an appropriate, somewhat more elaborate response in the last four bars, which utilizes some of the more typical New Orleans r & b phrase language. This is an excellent place to get started learning Henry Butler's boogies. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Meade Lux Lewis. 
@002 After Dinner Blues. A slow, lazy blues-the way you feel when you've overeaten a really good meal-which contains rich chord changes and a healthy array of Henry Butler's blues figures played more slowly here than in many other of his performances. This make this piece an excellent piece to begin studying Butler's style without compromising the richness and complexity of the harmonies. The figures appear in varying velocities, making this a blues in which you'll be able to see your increasing technical dexterity. The left hand alternates between broken tenths and a slow stride, offering the same advantages for learning these techniques. If the bridge sounds familiar, it's because it follows the chord changes to the standard "That's All," but watch what Butler does with the melody. Difficulty level: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Ray Charles.
@003 Bar Code Boogie. This begins sounding like a traditional straight-ahead boogie from the 1940s, with a slightly original sounding left hand boogie pattern (F-Ab-A-Bb-B-C-B-C) in shuffle rhythm. But listen closely to hear how Butler takes it out of the predictable from time to time by displacing the rhythm of the right hand figures and not giving us the repetition that we expect. This adds interest and excitement to a form which often ends up being too predictable and "four-square. " The lesson is to set up a pattern, but to vary it-even slightly-before completing the fourth repetition, the one which would fill a four-bar section of the 12-bar blues. With elaborate and effective use of right-hand tremolo. Difficulty level: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@004 Boogie for Jerry Lee. Let 'er rip! Pull out the stops-here it comes! This is rock 'n' roll excitement. What makes a Jerry Lee Lewis style boogie? Straight eighth notes, a simple boogie bass (1-5 to 1-6), flashy dramatic devices, often with more sound than taste (glissandos up and down the piano); breaks in the boogie pattern that leave the right hand high and dry, pounding out a repetitive pattern in the upper two octaves of the piano; wide hand separation most of the time; little or no single note lines; and forget subtlety. This style is played at top volume, and it's almost purely a rhythmic exercise, virtually a dance in itself. Everything about it is pure Jerry Lee except the ending chord: Butler's signature #11 chord. If it were classical music it would be the ideal encore. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@005 Blue Waltz. A piece which begins as a homey waltz, almost sentimental, but which ends its first phrase with an excursion into the bVI (Eb to BMaj), which will certainly surprise you, and possibly delight you. The rhythm is that of a slow jazz waltz, with just the first two beats played in most measures, creating a "sprung" effect, so that the rhythm almost seems to jump out of the barlines each measure. The improvisation section is pure Butler, including some bona fide pyrotechniques, which lives things up. But that harmonic eye-opener keeps returning, until the very end when Butler goes into a gospel mode for the coda. Difficulty level: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Bill Evans.
@006 Do You Really Love Me. A very fresh, danceable boogie with a classic, though not as common C-C-Eb-E-G-G-A-G bassline in straight eighths, but with an unusual chord progression, just the antidote for the eternal I-IV-I, viz. a 16-bar C/C/C/C//Eb7/Eb7/Eb7/Eb7//F7/F7/D7/D7//G7/G7/G7/G7// (with double slashes between the four-bar sections). Try using it in other rhythmic contexts: it'll freshen up any blues performance. The title came out of the melody line(note vice versa). Once you know it, it practically says it, right from the piano. Notice also where Butler goes harmonically at the end. He takes us on yet another excursion, as if to let us down from high of the unusual chords. Level of difficulty: 4. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Otis Spann.
@007 E Pluribus Blunum. With a stark repeating fifth in the bass, this piece takes a circuitous journey through some rather unconventional but very convincing blues chords in a 16-bar form: Gm/Gm/Gm/Gm//Eb/Eb/Gm/Gm//Bb/Bb/A/Ab//Gm/Gm/Gm/Gm//. It goes down a major third for the second four-bar section, whereas "Do You Really Love Me" goes up a minor third. The melody makes liberal use of the fourth interval, with a somewhat Chinese-like result. Then about 2/3 of the way through Butler relieves the left-hand pattern by launching into an interactive sprung-contrapuntal section, in which the left hand plays deep syncopated octaves, while the right hand plays in octaves and fifths, thus preserving the hollow fifth feel from the first section, but taking it to a new level. Butler then returns to the first motif before adding a coda. The overall effect is one of blues from another culture. Some people might even believe that this is a 14th century Chinese blues. Anyone for blues from another planet? Level of difficulty: 4. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Thelonius Monk.
@008 Ballad of the Jazz Cafe. There's a poignant grandeur in this piece, one of the true masterpieces of this collection. A slow-moving piece featuring large sections with powerful 1-5-1 chords in the bass, one per measure, and with deeply plaintive chord changes. The mood is melancholic, and it clearly tells a story. Harmonically, the piece relies for its effects on unusual chord combinations, such as the juxtaposition of minor tonics with Major 7th chords on the bVI (rather than the usual dominant seventh); and on descending whole-tone root movement with parallel chords (Db7#11-B7#11-A7#11-G7#11-AbMaj7, a deceptive cadence). You'll make some enlightening harmonic discoveries if you analyze this piece. Level of difficulty: 4. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of George Shearing.
@009 La Deca-Dance. A real bravado piece that combines a joyous gospel feel with unmistakable James Booker-style sections. The dotted rhythm in the left hand drives the beat forward, as each quarter note is preceded by a sixteenth note. The initial melody has an "old-timey" feel to it and flows seamlessly into the Booker section, one of those ingeniously simple Im-V7-V7-Im chord alternations, which when done in just the right rhythm, express a timeless authenticity and depth. Butler's left hand is at its most powerful and varied in this piece, giving a new dimension to the notion of solo piano. Notice how much power he derives from single low bass notes, when they're played in that dotted rhythm. Level of difficulty: 5. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@010 La Nuage et Moi. A lazy, slow stride standard-like tune, which visits many musical mansions: a catalogue of runs, tremolos, effects and blues patterns, which like the cloud after which it is named, keeps changing its form. The bass sometimes goes into broken tenths. Notice the alternation among melody playing in octaves and chords and the single note embellishments, and how it's all connected together. A particularly useful effect is the "splashed" chord-a right hand chord played by sliding down from black keys to white and often shaken after that. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Muddy Waters.
@011 Latest Gossip Blues. Against a single-note boogie bass that reaches up to the b7, the county style blues right hand four octaves higher declaims in discreet statements, almost like two old biddies gossiping across the fence. The right hand line becomes more continuous and soon the left hand moves into two-note chords in shuffle rhythm. When the left hand returns to the original pattern, the right hand keeps getting denser-as the gossip get juicier. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of John Lee Hooker.
@012 Let Me Be. A soul/gospel piece with in a hypnotic triple meter that conjures up the image of a robed gospel choir singing the repeating anchor phrase, with the soloist out front responding with a different melody answer each time, which evolves into the next section of the song and then proceeds to its very satisfying resolution. This is one of the best constructed compositions in this collection. During the improvised section the left hand reverts to a two-note chordal boogie shuffle, as the accompaniment rhythm becomes more steady. There are no really fast passages, just good, solid, satisfying music. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@013 Living Room Waltz. A sentimental country waltz, the perfect thing to play for the "family values" contingent of your clan. The bass is a "sprung" waltz stride, root-chord-rest, which imparts more forward motion than the standard root-chord-chord. The licks are distinctly country style home cookin', though Butler manages to sneak in a few of his trusty blues devices. He finally pulls us out of total conventionality with a series of refreshing key changes right before the end. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Amos Milburn.
@014 Lucky Sevens. Just in case you were getting too complacent playing everything in either 4/4 or 3/4 here's a piece in 7/4. The ostinato left hand keeps you honest and suggests an excellent way to practice odd meters, namely by keeping a repetitive bass going. The piece has a catchy melody and short bravado improvised section, so it's not too much to tackle. At the very end Butler suggests another left hand style for this meter. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Herbie Hancock.
@015 Midnight Mambo. A celebratory mambo in the tradition of "Mardi Gras Mambo. " The chord changes are I-V-I, and IV-I-V-I in the bridge, but the flavoring is blues, just as Professor Longhair had it, with an abundance of blues figures. The melody enters in single notes against a single note bass pattern, so it's an easy piece to approach, and excellent practice to keep that 1-3-5 bass pattern going whatever the right hand is playing. The bridge begins to utilize more chords but they are the simple two-note chords of the blues, often with one of the notes repeating while the other moves. This piece is an excellent illustration of what you can do with a change of rhythmic feel, while keeping the same repertory of licks and runs. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@016 Mineralogy. This tribute to bebop contains a pun in the title: it's a take-off on the various "ologies" Charlie Parker named tunes after ("Ornithology," "Anthropology"). In contrast to most of the other tunes in this collection, this one contains none of the blues commonplaces from the New Orleans or r&b tradition. Its melody lines are pure bebop: scale-based with the twists and turns which so characterized that joyous bravado style. Butler's left hand alternates between a modified Bud Powell-type "shell" comping and a walking bass. In the Powell style, which became one of the standards for jazz piano players thereafter, only two notes of the chord (root-seventh, root-third, or third-seventh, usually) are played, leaving the rest of the chord quality to be suggested by the right hand melody line. Butler's variation on this is to play a three-note chord with the root and seventh on the bottom and the third on the top in a filled-tenth. This is quite a stretch-it was actually pioneered by Art Tatum-and will take some practice, but you can see how powerful it is. The comp chords do not supply a continuous rhythm, but rather punctuate the unfolding melody with syncopated accents, which propel the line forward. In contrast, the walking bass-a much more difficult technique-provides a continuous rhythm, with somewhat less harmonic detail, but with comparable opportunity for syncopated emphasis in the short "push" notes inserted in between the quarter notes of the walking line. As a change from both of these more conventional bebop left hand activities, Butler uses stark 1-5 chords a little more that half-way through. These anchor the harmony, connect to the blues roots and provide a ground for a new right hand melodic motif to bounce off of. He also uses a variation on the filled tenths in a root-chord pattern, using only two-note chords, namely the seventh and third. It's basically a broken version of the filled tenth. Difficulty: 5. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Charlie Parker.
@017 Nutria Suite Blues. This piece sets up a "home base" rhythm of a straight-eighth note, 24 bar boogie in Eb, but includes a number of very refreshing departures-both harmonic and rhythmic-at key dramatic points throughout. This makes it an excellent way to pick up some of Henry Butler's more advanced left hand rhythmic devices without having to sustain them throughout an entire piece. After a jagged introduction, which should indicate some of the antics to come, Butler settles into the boogie bass. No problems here. But then in the last section of the blues form he goes to the bVII chord for two measures, in this case Db, then to Bbsus, which just barely resolves to Bb7 before returning to the tonic. Also at this point the rhythm suddenly becomes disjointed with his characteristic syncopated deep bass notes in a kind of dialogue with the right hand. It's a fresh, challenging way to end the blues form. After two of these, however, he gives us a bridge: Cm-Gm-Ab-Bbsus (=Ab/Bb). The result is that a fairly conventional boogie becomes something quite exciting. The title, by the way, is a double pun. Nutria is a large swamp rodent with orange incisors, important to Louisiana from Argentina in 1930 by McIlhenny of Tabasco Sauce fame, and spreading ever since. "Nutria Suite" is an obvious pun on a wildly popular artificial sweetener, although it could easily be a group of rooms in the New Orleans Hilton. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Fats Domino.
@018 Reunion Blues. A stirring two fisted masterpiece combining a driving up-beat shuffle, a "sprung" stride and double octave passages, with a harmonically surprising extended blues form and a bridge. The shuffle sounds stronger than a conventional boogie because Butler plays it mostly in octaves on the root. The piece is in Ab and unusual ending goes to B7|||-Ebm/Bb|-Eb7#9|-Db7|||-B7|-Bbm7-Eb7 (the |'s indicate repetitions of the chord, so B7 extends through four beats, Ebm/Bb two beats, Eb7#9 two beats, etc. ) Butler switches to his "sprung stride" for the bridge, which goes up to the VIm chord, or Fm, then to Cm, Db7, Ebsus, Edim, then repeats. Once out of the head he parks the rhythm in a more conventional shuffle boogie. Our ears regroup and he launches into the pyrotechniques of his up tempo soloing. Level of difficulty: 4. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Jelly Roll Morton.
@019 Music Box Boogie . The music box quality of this boogie comes from its concentration in the middle of the keyboard, its jerky motion at moderate up tempo and the incessant chord alternation of the bass pattern. Stylistically it's typical of the 30s and 40s boogie, and shows you what can be done when blues figures are correctly in balance. It's a compelling piece, given its drive, the richness of the accompaniment pattern, the heavily chordal right hand, even though it sports no memorably melody, apart from the classic blues figures. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@020 Everybody's Havin' Fun . A joyous romping mambo similar to the way Professor Longhair (Henry Roeland Byrd, 1918-1980) used to write them. The tune practically sings out its title in the concluding line of the melody: everybody's havin' fun. This is dance music, party music, and should remind listeners that music is so important to the life of New Orleans, that any night of the week the music spills out onto the streets of certain neighborhoods (not just Bourbon Street). This tune exemplifies the rich possibilities of chordal r & b style playing in the right hand. If the left hand's roll is primarily rhythmic, and the harmonies are pretty much set in advance, then that leaves the right hand to thicken the textures and add the harmonic nuances, and that's exactly what you find here. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@021 Shades of Booker. This piece consists of two alternating sections, major and minor, both of which are accompanied by a simple, yet effect chordal rhythmic pattern dear to the late James Booker (1940-1983), New Orleans pianist extraordinaire. The chordal pattern consists of two quarter notes followed by a half-note. It sounds simple, even archaic, but Booker could dig in with it to a place very deep in blues consciousness. It recalls children's songs and Civil War era ditties, pieces like "Jump Down, Spin Around. " Meanwhile the right hand rhythms are very close to ragtime. The major-minor alteration increases the dramatic content of the piece. You can hear the contrast between light and dark, between good and evil, between elation and depression. One could imagine it as a silent movie accompaniment. Use this piece as an example and try to create your own music with strongly contrasting moods in different stylistic settings. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@022 Sour Milk Boogie. A solid exuberant boogie shuffle with a broken chord walking bass and a riff melody as might have been played in the 40s. Can't you see those bobby-soxers jitterbug!. A riff melody is a simple phrase which is played during the first four-bar section of the blues and repeated during the second one, changing only the major third of the tonic (the E natural in the C chord in the key of C) to the flat seventh of the subdominant (the Eb in the F7 in the same key). The phrase has a front part and a back part. The third four-bar section begins with a different front part-the answer-but ends with the same back part. After running through this twice, Butler launches into an exciting improvised section consisting largely of continuous triplet lines (corresponding to the implicit triplets of the shuffle rhythm), interrupted now and again by a crush of notes-more notes fit into less space. This gives a feeling of overbrimming pleasure, of excess, of almost too much to handle, to certain points in the solo. Butler comes out of it by offering a simplification of the riff before returning to the actual riff and the final coda. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@023 Still Young at Fifty. The title refers to the bebop sound, which crystallized just about fifty years ago, and although other types of jazz and blues have succeeded it, it remains a vital and challenging idiom, and the basis for modern jazz. The chord changes of this blues are typical bebop changes: F|||/Bb|Bdim|/F|||/Cm7|F7|/. Bb|||/Bbm7|Eb7|/Am7|||/Abm7|Db7|/. Gm7|||/C7|||/F|Abdim|/Gm7|C7|/. (with |representing repetitions of the chord and / representing measure boundaries). The left hand begins with a combination of Bud Powell "shell" chords, root-shell, 1-7-3 tenths, and single notes, then goes into a walking bass to raise the level of excitement. This then alternates with strumming and goes back to the first accompaniment style, before the two-hand melody choruses bring the improve section to its climax. After that a return to the head and out. Butler almost completely avoids the melodic devices of r & b in the right hand, staying with pure bebop. Neat, but not so easy, but it's very good to be at home in more than one style. Level of Difficulty: 4. Pianist Henry Butler. Picture of Duke Ellington.
@024 Sweet 46. This is one of the masterpieces of this collection: a slow gospel blues waltz honoring Henry Butler's musical roots in the sacred music of his family's church, the first music he came to know and love as a child, in this tune, named for his age. This is a grandiose piece of music. Notice all the devices he uses to get maximum sonority out of the piano: low bass notes, rich tenor chords, left hand octaves with right hand chords, two-handed chordal melodies in the treble with pick-up notes, the same shaken going up the inversions of the diminished chord, abrupt changes in range, strumming chords in the left hand. Many of these are not particularly difficult, and Butler shows you here how to string them together. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Fats Domino.
@025 Friday Night in the Faubourg. Friday night in the Faubourg Marigny, that is, where New Orleans has its greatest concentration of music clubs catering to locals and changing bands and kinds of music, every night, even twice a night. You might hear a Latin beat from one direction (Cafe Brazil), and souped-up brass-band honky tonk from across the street (Cafe Istanbul, formerly the Dream Palace), then some serious blues in the next block (at Snug Harbor)-this tune represents that musical smorgasbord. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Bill Evans.
@026 The Henry Did It. One of the strongest pieces of this collection, this is pure, powerful funk: highly melodic, highly rhythmic, syncopated to the hilt. It's the rhythm which is so compelling, of course, so the melody can utilize repetition and maintain a high level of interest. In fact, the repetition adds to the suspense. The harmony of this music relies heavily on unresolved sus chords, especially on the dominant. The A section is a 10-bar form. The first chord progression after the intro goes: G|GoverB|/C|Cm7| over two measures three times before going to Eb7 for three bars, resolving to Dsus in the last bar of the form before returning to the top. The bridge begins on C# half-diminished, with a C# in the base and an Em chord in the right hand; descends to a Cm7 (Eb/C), then to a G/B and then back to G. It does this twice. The third time it goes to a G/Bb rather than G/B, Dsus/A, gets crazy on a Cm7 chord before the Dsus leading back to the top. Notice how Butler uses the very same r & b melodic devices he's used elsewhere to keep the repetitions interesting. There are some short boogie sections for contrast, and then a return to the funk. Once you know the secret of the harmony it's not a difficult tune to learn. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Ray Charles.
@027 Cactus Bay. This blues is unusual in that each chorus is 32 bars long. The entire performance consists of only 2 choruses with a short tag. Cactus Bay is a beautiful place on Waiheke Island in New Zealand where the pianist (David Paquette) lives. This uncomplicated chord sequence is often  punctuated by cascading runs which usually occur on a passing chord i. e. I 7 to IV 7. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Kenny Barron.
@028 Cool Minor. This haunting piece incorporates what Jelly Roll Morton called the "Spanish tinge: As well as the blues elements ,the minor chord progression supports a melody that is based on the harmonic minor scale which lends the Spanish flavour. The hesitations are a dramatic device to sustain interest from the listener.  Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Louis Armstrong.
@029 The Possum. A Lighter less intense slow blues that conjures up a cool blues style of the 1950's. Popular blues like Swinging Shepherd and Meet Mr Rabbit are other examples of this style. The Errol Garner left hand style is also utilised. The addition of the VI7 chord in the final chorus anticipates the ending. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Kenny Barron.
@030 Blues For Rosie. Hundreds of this type of pop-tinted  rhythm & blues ballad graced the pop charts in the 1940's & 50's. Songwriters like Charles Brown and Ivory Joe Hunter wrote in this style. The 8 bar bridge differentiates it from the standard 12 bar blues progression. At bar 86 the bridge takes on a new feel. The simplicity of the left hand and repetitive phrases in the high register are reminiscent of the great blues shouter and pianist Roosevelt Sykes, a friend and mentor of Davids, hence the title. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Otis Spann.
@031 Sadie Ida & Billie. This Barrellhouse shuffle takes its name from and is a tribute to the three goodson sisters, Sadie ,Ida & Billie, who brought their wonderful Florida blues style to New Orleans. This piece is a mild interpretation of a raucous  afternoon in the 1960's that David spent at the home of Billie and Dede Pierce whilst her two. sisters were visiting. Some of the right hand riffs are reminiscent of the  New Orleans band style a la Kid Thomas Valentine  This type of ending was often included to demand the listeners attention. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@032 Smell the City. David cites this as an example of Urban Blues. It recalls the style of players such as Roosevelt Sykes and Otis Spann. You may recognise the dramatic yet unconventional use of Joe Olivers "Snag it" break in bar  62 thru 65. This tune was inspired by Auckland City as David stepped of the ferry from Waiheke Island. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Otis Spann. 
@033 Steal The Feel. This standard Bb blues steals its feel from a Texas Barrelhouse piano style made popular by the likes of Robert Shaw. His fine recordings on Arhooli Records preserved this style. The alternating loping stride and boogie choruses lend a unique flavor to this  performance. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Memphis Slim.
@034 Keep Talkin. This example of the talking blues progression starts out with an Alton Purnell introduction. Alton was the pianist best known for his banned piano work with George Lewis in the revival. bands. The format is used in many types of music in the 20's & 30's ranging from the classic blues vocal performances of Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith and Victoria Spivey through to jug bands and on to Fats Wallers novelty tunes. Here David Paquette gives a fresh interpretation of the genre by incorporating a rhythm & Blues feel. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Meade Lux Lewis.
@035 What Trouble. This piece is loosely based on the traditional "Trouble in Mind" chord progression David utilises a more sophisticated jazz piano style here. Elements employed by pianists such as Earl Hines and Jess Stacy. give the vehicle a more 1930's pop music feel. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Albert Ammons.
@036 No Worries. This boogie Woogie had its inception in the old standard "The Honeydripper" It starts with a rocking left hand and moves into a walking bass line often found in the boogie woogies of the later performances of. Meadee Lux Lewis. Paquette adds another dimension by breaking into a robust stride chorus at bar 88. Pianist:  David Paquette. Picture of Meade Lux Lewis.
@037 C Boogie, is played with a straight eighth feel in the key of C. This Chicago boogie style is reminiscent of players like Jimmie Ansee, Albert Ammons and  Otis Span. This is a hard drivin', even feel boogie. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Otis Spann.
@038 Cakewalk, is a slow swing boogie blues in C.  The feel is New Orleans or Chicago. Notice the characteristic bass octaves walking in a 'cakewalk' feel. Performed by Doc Fingers. Picture of Muddy Waters.
@039Cal's Shuffle, is played in swing tempo in the key of G.  It's a fast shuffle with stops, styled after tunes like 'Kansas City' and other fast shuffle blues Chuck Berry, Jay McShann and others. Left hand stays on a hard driving octaves. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Fats Domino.
@040 Carl's Blues, is played with a basic swing boogie woogie pattern in the key of C.  Notice the slow boogie blues tempo and straight ahead feel. The left hand is a variation of a country and western riff. Performed by Doc Fingers.  Picture of Memphis Slim.
@041 Hard Time Blues, is played in C with a swing feel. It's an eight bar blues which demonstrates a slow, left-hand boogie pattern with right-hand, free style blues lines.  Left hand has characterisitc pattern going from the 1-5 to 1-6. Improvisation on top of a slow bass. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of John Lee Hooker.
@042  Mama Doc's Boogie, is a slow boogie woogie blues reminiscent of New Orleans or Chicago. This is played in the style of players like Professor Longhair, Albert Ammons, Jimmie Ansee and Ray Charles. Performed by Doc Fingers. Picture of Albert Ammons.
@043 Lurchin', is played in C with a swing feel (as opposed to straight eighths). Played in a Chicago blues stomp style, it is inspired by tunes like  'Searchin''.Picture of Muddy Waters.
@044 The Mississippi Stomp, is a swing shuffle played in E. It has  a Jerry Reed, Mississippi Delta Blues feel.  This is commonly known as a guitar-type blues. E is not a popular key for Blues on the Piano. E is a popular key for Guitar players, since there are open notes in the key of E on the guitar. Popular keys for guitar players ar E,G, A, wheras piano players prefer C,F,G and Bb. You should learn to play in all keys of course ! Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of T-Bone Walker.
@045 The Movin' On Blues, is played with a swing feel in the key of G.  It's a Buffalo (New York) type of blues feel with a stomping bass line that is in octaves, and stomps out the riff for most of the tune'. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Ray Charles.
@046 The Shingle Stomp, is played in Bb with a swing feel. It's a New Orleans clarinet type of tune, inspired by rhythms by Professor Longhair and James Booker '. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Professor Longhair.
@047 Teeny Blues. Teeny Blues. This is a slowed down Chicago Blues in G. It has is built around a riff that is played by both hands, and then the left hand only during the solos. Performed by Doc Fingers. Picture of George Shearing.
@048 Walkin' Home, is played with a straight eighth feel in the key of C. It uses a walking bass in octaves playing in even 8ths . This style is referred to as "Chicago stride style blues". Performed by Doc Fingers.  Picture of Tuts Washington.
@049 The Winone Shuffle, is performed in C with a swing feel. It is based on a  Winone Harris, Louie Jordan type of blues. This type of blues often starts off with a medium shuffle boogie pattern, with horn lines. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@050 Thirty Minute Woman, is played with a swing feel in the key of A. Played with a St. Louis kind of feel, (late forties, early fifties R & B blues from St. Louis and Chicago). Has a New Orleans romp feel in the middle. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Kenny Barron.
@051 The Red Light Blues, is played with a straight eighth feel in the key of Gm. It has a Chicago or St. Louis blues feel and is based on tunes like 'The Thrill is Gone' and 'Whatever's Happening Between Us' or 'Come Together (by the Beatles). The piano sound  should have vibrato and chorus in it. Performed by Doc Fingers. Picture of BB King.
@052 Blues in F, is a riff-type blues written by Oliver Gannon .  This is played in the style of Wynton Kelly, Tommy Flanagan or Cedar Walton. A riff is a repeated, blues-type phrase that can be played over and over behind the changing chords.  Because of its' 12 bar repeated nature,  the blues is a good place to start when learning improvisation because the chord progression becomes so familiar. In bar 1, the 4th beat of the melody is an A. Notice how it is "blues-ified" by the addition of the C on top as well as rolling into the A with an Ab. This technique can be used on other non-blues tunes as well. Key of F.  Performed by:   Renee Rosnes. Picture of Oliver Gannon.
@053 Blues for Dr. John, was written by Miles Black. This is a solo bar-room boogie blues played in the style of Dr. John, Champion Jack Dupree and others. It incorporates many of the devices and tricks which have been invented and passed down over the years. Notice the variation at bar 43. Key of C (of course!).  Performed by:   Miles Black. Picture of Ray Charles.
@054 Boogie Blues, was written by Miles Black. This exuberant solo blues is played in Ray Bryant or Dr. John style. The left hand lays down the bass and the rhythm in a simple and repetitive groove. All the variation comes from the right hand. All the great blues piano players had something unique to contribute to the art form. This performance encapsulates many of these pianistic devices. Key of C.   Performed by:  Miles Black. Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@055 Ray's Mood, was written by Miles Black. This is a gospel piece in the style of Ray Charles. Although it is not a blues, this tune has a gospel-blues feel throughout. Some of the pianistic devices played here were pioneered by the great Earl "Fatha" Hines. Notice the use of triads with "blues-ified" approaches in the right hand and the laid-back rhythmic feel.  Key of G.  Performed by:  Miles Black.  Picture of Ray Charles.
@056 Blues in Bb, written by Chris Sigerson,  is a study of  voicings and reharmonization based on the basic blues progression. This piece demonstrates voice leading, whole tone descending #9 chords, tri-tone substitution, stacked voicings, walking bass and locked hands approaches. Note that in most cases throughout the Jazz Pianist, the chord display has been kept simple. A bar of G7 might have many passing chords and alterations which are often not indicated. This gives a better understanding of how the pianist works with (and adds to) simple concepts.  Key of Bb. Performed by: Chris Sigerson. Picture of Thelonius Monk.
@057 Good Cookin' , features a standard swing-blues progression in F. This basic blues is played in a typical medium groove and is compatible with such compositions as, 'Now's the Time', 'Bag's Groove' and 'Route 66' . The piano comping is sparse, in the style of  John Lewis, founder of the Modern Jazz Quartet. The bass line is in the solid style of Percy Heath. The key is F. Picture of Kenny Barron.
@058 Gypsy Blues, demonstrates a  24 bar swing blues in Bb with reharmonized changes. The initial structure ( Imaj7, VIIm7b5, III7 ) is found in such tunes as 'Confirmation', 'Bluesette' and 'Come Rain or Come Shine'. The comping (left hand only) is played in the style of Oscar Peterson. The bass line is played in a  Ray Brown '2' feel throughout. Notice the use of high notes. The key is Bb.Picture of Herbie Hancock.
@059 Rockin' My Soul, features a funky swing blues with left hand only comping in the style of Gene Harris (with a little 4/4 Errol Garner thrown in occasionally) and a crisp bass line modeled after players like Neils Henning Orsted Pederson. This standard blues progression can be found in tunes like  'The Swingin' Shepherd Blues', 'Things Ain't What they Used to Be' and 'The Thumb'. The key is C. Picture of George Shearing.
@060 Born To Sing the Blues. This medium-swing tune begins with a Im7, IV7, Im7, IV7, progression found in tunes like 'Summertime', 'Four on Six' and 'Groove Yard'. Although it is 24 bars long, and has a bluesy feel, it is not a blues, in spite of the title, because it is not modeled on the basic structure of the blues . The comping is played in the swingin' and bluesy style of Wynton Kelly, with the bass line emulating the indefatigable Percy Heath. The key is Dm. Picture of Thelonius Monk.
@061 Afternoon in Carmel, is a minor swing blues progression found in such tunes as, 'Mr. P.C.', 'The Five Spot after Dark', and 'The thrill is Gone'. The comping features some of the unique voicings of players like McCoy Tyner with bass lines in the driving tradition of Jimmy Garrison. The key is Cm. Picture of Charlie Parker.
@062  Another Blues, features an altered 12 bar swing-blues. Altered blues progressions can be found in compositions such as, 'Bluesette', 'The Kicker' and 'Blue Comedy'. In this variation, the IV7 chord in the 5th bar is replaced by a IVm7 chord. The comping has a responsive quality found in the style of players like Herbie Hancock. Note the Ron Carter approach to the bass lines and the use of wide intervals such as 10ths. The key is Bb. Picture of Herbie Hancock.
@063 Blues in B Sharp Minor. This is a minor blues swing, typical of blues progressions such as 'Mr. P.C.', 'The Five Spot after Dark', and 'Eye of the Hurricane'. The comping has some of the dense voicings and occasional impressionistic features found in Bill Evan's playing. The bass line was inspired by the very melodic playing of the great Scott LaFaro. Notice the use of space and the use of double-stop fifths. The key is Cm.Picture of Bill Evans.
@064  Flippin' and a Flyin'. This is a standard 12-bar swing blues chord structure, found in such tunes as 'Now's the Time', 'Billie's Bounce', 'Tenor Madness' and 'Bag's Groove'. The comping is played with the left hand only in the style of pianists like Tommy Flanagan. The bass has that East coast driving feel of players like Keiter Betts. The key is F. Picture of Dizzy Gillespie.
@065 Lazy Evening Blues. This is an altered swing blues progression. The progression in the first four bars, (Imaj7, VIIm7b5, III7, VIm7) is found in such tunes as 'Confirmation', 'Bluesette' and 'Come Rain or Come Shine'. Charlie Parker liked to use a reharmonized progression similar to this one. Notice the chromatic IIm7, V7 's starting at bar 6. The comping (left hand only) is played in the style of Bud Powell. Note the use of 10ths, 7ths, and 6ths. The bass line is played in a  steady 40's style reminiscent of players like Oscar Pettiford. The key is G. Picture of Charlie Parker.
@066 Gone With the Dawn,  is a 12 bar swing blues in Eb.  What makes this progression unique is the abundance of Sus4 chords. Any blues may be harmonized in this manner to create this Sus4 sound. McCoy Tyner and John Coltrane exploited this sound frequently and it is found in renditions of tunes like 'Ruby, Ruby', 'Afro Blue' and almost any 'Trane' blues. The left hand comping is played in the style of Wynton Kelly and the bass line is modeled after the consistent groove of Paul Chambers. The key is Eb. Picture of Thelonius Monk.
@067 Cloudy Day Blues, features a funky straight-eighths minor blues progression which can be found in compositions such as, 'The Jody Grind', 'Comin' Home Baby' and 'Funky Minor Blues'. The left hand comping is in the style of Horace Silver. The bass line is appropriately funky and simple, not unlike what players like Sam Jones would play in this situation. The key is Bbm. Picture of Miles Black.
@068 Runaround. This straight-eighths tune is blues-based, although it is not technically a blues. Funk tunes such as 'Watermellon Man', 'Ode to Billy Joe', and 'Hard Day's Night' fit into this category. The comping is played with a Gene Harris feel. Note the use of octaves. The bass line, a la Ray Brown, is quite active. The key is G.Picture of Herbie Hancock.
@069 Johnny Man's Been Here. This is a funky straight eighth blues-like progression is found in tunes like 'Ode to Billy Joe',  'Hard Day's Night' and 'Watermellon Man' . The funky left hand is in the style of Herbie Hancock and the bass features a repetitive groove similar to what Ron Carter might play. The key is F. Picture of Herbie Hancock.
@070 Clippin' and Colidin'. This is a rock (straight-eighths) boogie blues progression in the style of  'Good Golly Miss Molly', 'Johnny B. Goode' and 'Great Balls of Fire'. The left hand features a simple boogie groove and the bass plays a 50's rockabilly line. The key is C.  Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@071 A Cafe in Paris, features a straight-eighths modified minor blues progression similar to compositions such as, 'Cantelope Island', 'The Jody Grind' and 'Comin' Home, Baby'. The comping and bass lines are played in a Blue Note funk style. The key is Fm. Picture of Bill Evans.
@
