@072 Backfield Blues. A study in the use of the extreme ends of the piano: the left hand boogie pattern stays in the moderately deep bass, while the right hand melody keeps mostly to the top two octaves of the piano, favoring tremolos and chordal playing. Although the melody is reminiscent of the classic "C. C. Rider," the emotional effect is the complete opposite: joyous and upbeat rather than mournful. Butler sets the tune up with a complete chorus of assertive walking boogie left hand in the Fats Domino style. The melody finally enters at the high end of the piano as a clear fresh voice, a call to hipness and an inspiration to dance. Difficulty level: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Fats Domino.
@073 Blues for Boswell. The first four bars of this blues recalls Jelly Roll Morton's "Original Jelly Roll Blues," but it quickly jumps into a shuffle boogie with all the trimmings. The main body of the head is little more than chords in rhythm against the boogie bass, but it works because the opening bars are so linear, and they are played in triple octaves with no accompaniment. The piece is a study in the use of repetitive figures, a high-energy style of boogie playing made popular in the 1930s and 40s and stayed popular ever since. Learn the few right-hand patterns and you'll have it all, as well as the admiration of your friends. The Morton opening proves that you can find material from throughout the history of jazz/blues piano to enrich your playing and pay tribute to this music's roots. Professor Longhair created an entire piece based on the two-hand melody of the second strain of Morton's "New Orleans Blues. " Just think what you could do with ragtime lines with some rhythmic alterations and the addition of some blue notes! Difficulty level: 1. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Jelly Roll Morton.
@074 Blues for Chuck. Henry Butler dedicates this exuberant straight-eighth note high-energy boogie to. Himself! Henry's middle name is Charles, so Chuck is-well, you know by now. This is pure rock and roll of the 50s variety, the kind that made this music cross over from the African-American community to the general US (and world) market, and it's easy to see why: it's absolutely irresistible: a driving, celebrating, screaming force-and all done on solo piano. It represents one of the marvelous extremes to which this instrument has been taken and which almost instantly became a classic sound. Notice that you can play this piece by mastering a few patterns, knowing the blues scale really well (the key is Eb, one of Butler's favorites), and playing it slowly to get the hand independence (or coordination) necessary to execute the rhythmic byplay, which gives it so much of its appeal. Learn the left hand first and one right hand pattern. Put them together, and then see of you can displace the right hand pattern rhythmically with respect to the left hand. Then learn another pattern. Some of the elements are extremely simple, like the repetition of high two-note chords in the right hand. Alternate between these simple repetitive elements and the more intricate patterns and scales. You'll soon be rockin' and rollin' jess like Henry. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@075 Blues for Big Joe. This tribute to Big Joe Turner takes the form of a dignified, largo memorial rather than a lament. One hears distant echoes of the "Tennessee Waltz" and closer references to "Please Send Me Someone to Love," all the while realizing more than ever the common ground which such a deeply heartfelt blues shares with gospel. It would be impossible-or at the very least inadvisable-to avoid gospel phrases in a piece like this, since they lend so much dignity and richness to this type of blues. This piece is an excellent vehicle for studying their use and integration into the slow blues. Difficulty level: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Ray Charles.
@076 Blues Gratia Blutis. This minor blues, which begins with stark simplicity, contains shades of Horace Silver's fifties funk style. Silver was an immensely influential musician, more as a composer than as a pianist, since he embodied hipness in perfect taste, in very accessible tunes, most of which have some kind of bite to them. You don't find the whimsy of Monk-nor the heights of his balladic beauty ("Round Midnight," "Crepuscule with Nellie," "Pannonica")-but for juicey, sometimes down and dirty, tunes Silver is always reliable. "Sister Sadie" was one of his hits and "The Preacher" (which sounds like a jazz version of "I've Been Working on the Railroad") became a standard, but also check out tunes like "Moon Rays," "Mysticism," "Ecaroh," "The St. Vitus Dance," "Come On Home," "The Outlaw," "Tokyo Blues," and the jazz standard "Nica's Dream. ". Butler takes "Blues Gratia Blutis" through several accompaniment setting, starting with the pared down 1-5 chords in the bass, moving to a more active bass, then a walking bass, finally a single chorus of stride before returning to the original setting. This tune again proves you don't have to be complicated to be effective-and authentic. I hope Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer will forgive our butchering of their motto. Actually, they're more likely to than your neighborhood Latin teacher (is "blues" a third declension noun?) Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Thelonius Monk.
@077 Blue Salsa. This exciting piece proves how adaptable the blues form is. This piece is clearly a salsa by virtue of its rhythm, its accompanying and melodic devices, in short, its musical language. Blues phrases and devices? The blues idiom is absent, but the piece clearly follows the blues chord structure, although you might not notice it if you're not listening closely. Also, the harmonic structure uses an alternative ending, valid with any style blues. In the key of C, rather than going to a G7 then F7, C7 and G7, in the last four bars, it goes to an unresolved Gsus4-a very contemporary sound-for one measure, then to Cm7 and F7 in a single measure, then back to the tonic measure and the turnaround (G7) measure. This is another version of a II-V departure from the norm in the last 4-bar section, which Butler uses to good effect in a number of the pieces in this collection. This particular departure is not very far harmonically, yet in the context of sus4 chords it sounds very fresh. This piece also offers excellent examples of two-handed salsa accompaniment. Listen to it separate from the upper part to learn a useful montuno pattern. Butler uses many typical salsa devices in the melody, too. We recorded this in two takes, four hands. Listen to the left hand separately in the "Lessons" section of this program. Learn it as a two-handed accompaniment, then try to reduce its spirit and effects to the left hand alone. Lay down a workable left hand, then listen to the piece a number of times to get its overall spirit, then put it together. Note also the montuno pattern in the coda. Level of difficulty: 4. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Dizzy Gillespie.
@078 Blues in the Afternoon. A moderate-tempo stride blues with a bridge-rolling, relaxing, but with the characteristic Butler blues figures. Notice, for example, how Butler will frequently end a phrase with a trill. You know what's coming, or at least you think you do-it's something very definite, almost inevitable-and then Henry gives you the musical equivalent of a shake or a wash. It keeps you interested and ready to absorb the next figure or piece of melody. Notice also the judicious ways Butler varies the stride base: most frequently by a bass line or broken tenths, but on one occasion with two-handed melody. It's important to have this device available. It acts as a kind of break, a suspension of the harmony and an underlining of the melody (Oscar Peterson is famous for it), which refreshes the listeners attention and capacity to absorb the harmonic richness of your full accompaniment. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Amos Milburn.
@079 Boogie for Breakfast. The piece begins with a clear wake-up call: the right hand calls out and the left hand responds; then the right hand calls again, in a kind of a response to the first call, and the left hand responds again. It amounts to another opening boogie/blues strategy, delaying the onset of the boogie pattern until the entry of the IV chord in measure 5. When the boogie pattern enters, it does so at full bore. This is an up tempo, no-holds-barred boogie, where the precision of the left hand is crucial. Try practicing the left hand alone at a slower speed and work up to the tempo of the piece. Do the same with the right. But when you put them together, you'll have to slow down again. Level of difficulty: 4. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of T-Bone Walker.
@080 Boogierobics. If you're looking for a workout, you've come to the right place. The continuous broken octave bass is quite a challenge to keep going, though once you can, you've acquired a powerful boogie engine. The right hand is one of the more elaborate ones, making this an all-around bravado piece. If you think you're hearing a reference to the bebop classic "Symphony Sid" towards the end, you're not dreaming. Level of difficulty: 5. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Buddy Guy.
@081 Butler's Lament. A slow, mournful minor blues with deep, sorrowful chord changes, but with a bridge which expresses hope. Although in a similar vein to "Angel Eyes" and "Black Coffee," it is more serious than either of them, expressing a weariness and deep sorrow in the most profound terms, going beyond the themes of lost love or betrayal. The left hand plays chords on the half note beat some of the time and sometimes on the quarter note beat, as the right hand spins out its tale with clear, poignant lines. Difficulty level: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Thelonius Monk.
@082 Butler's Boogie. A happy romping blues with a straight eight-note broken octave boogie left hand in New Orleans style. The bridge goes off into the bII key (via the bVI), which is refreshingly unusual in New Orleans music, but sounds quite natural in this context. Note how the rhythmic anticipations in the melody bring you in. Chords still dominate the melody in the right hand of the improvised section, tastefully punctuated with Butler's trademark lighting blues runs. Difficulty level: 4. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@083 Desire Under the El. This medium shuffle blues begins very similarly to "Under the Fig Tree" and "Looking Up from the Gutter,"-an opening with triplet chords in the right hand-but the repeat phrase ends differently, more elaborately. This piece offers a more advanced treatment of the same kind of device (which you should use no more than once an evening, in some form or other). Butler comes up with a rich inventory of blues devices against a constant boogie shuffle bass. Note the tag ending, a very useful device, and the use of #11 (#4) chords as a concluding gesture. To get that sound voice the chord with the 3 and #4 next to each other in the right hand, with the 6 above it, e. g. for F7: F-Eb in the left hand and A-B-D-F in the right hand, which amounts to a Bm7b5 (the tritone chord of F) in 3rd inversion over a 1-b7 left hand shell (outer note) voicing. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of John Lee Hooker.
@084 Disco Moonrise. This is another of the "crypto-blues" in this series: a musical form externally unlike the blues, but yet which embodies some essential but not necessarily conspicuous blues characteristic which allows us to include it as a blues. Disco music is characterized by a driving repetitive rhythm and slow harmonic movement-chords prevail for long stretches at a time. The blues form, which relies on harmonic contrasts, is not very obvious, when the change to the IV chord happens eight or more measure down the line. In addition, Butler employs some of the standard harmonic devices of disco music, which are very useful to create a contemporary sound: chord alternation between the tonic Fm and Eb major, landing on the relative major, Ab major; and later, chord alternation between Fm and Db major, which throws tonic weight back and forth between them. When the Bb7 (the IV chord) occurs in a kind of bridge, this normally very conventional blues gesture takes on much additional power, like an opening out onto a vast new space. The bass pattern is technically quite simple, mostly just repeating octaves, but notice the rhythmic variations Butler uses to keep it interesting. Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Herbie Hancock.
@085 Looking Up from the Gutter. A "down-and-out" style urban boogie blues in moderate shuffle rhythm, which opens with a crying-out measure of solid triplet chords. This becomes the recurring theme of the piece, full of the kind of repetitious figures and tremolos which can be so profound in this kind of blues. A study in effectiveness through simple means. Notice however, how Butler appends nuances of drop-off notes at the end of the repetitive figure, which adds a warmth and richness to the figure, reassuring the listener of the music's authenticity. Difficulty level: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of T-Bone Walker.
@086 My Woman Blues. When someone mentions honky-tonk, this is what they mean, although this might be somewhat better quality than your average barroom pianist in the Yukon. But it's all here: the implicit triplet rhythm of the melody as it saunters along, the moderately paced stride with walk-ups in the bass, the shakes, the clangy chords in the melody. It all tells the old story of love and sex and betrayal. You've heard it a hundred times and you still love it. Now, once we've said that you might notice that Butler has included his characteristic runs and his interesting coda, both of which are beyond the technical prowess of most purveyors of the barroom genre. There is also a lack of typical blues devices: this is another kind of music, with its own kind of charm. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Memphis Slim.
@087 New Orleans Rain Dance. Watch out-this mambo's headed for classicdom! It's catchy, it's shakin', and it's easy to learn! Chords are in the right and; the left hand plays syncopated single notes, and the head phrase ends with the appropriate up-short bang, often vocalized as a loud "uh!" (a rhythmic anticipation, typical of mambos and other music). The improvised section is a study in two-note chords with a moving bottom note, with a characteristic lightening up-and- down run at the climax. They'll love ya' if you learn this one! Level of difficulty: 2. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@088 Pickle in the Pocket. This blues takes you back to the heroic days of the early country blues players, the ones playing in the dilapidated juke joints, barely lit, on a beat up old piano for a room full of inebriated highly sexed dancers. Of course some of these players recorded, made it to Chicago, made hit records in the "Race Records" category the major labels reserved for the African-American market. Years later they were anthologized by the Folkways label, and later transcribed and put in book form by Eric Kriss in the early seventies-names like Champion Jack Dupre, Little Brother Montgomery, Speckled Red, and Otis Spann. When these artists began their careers the blues form hadn't stabilized, so chords frequently went on much longer than we are accustomed to. There were a lot of repeated notes and chords, as you'll find in this piece. The rhythm in a slow blues like this one, ambled on, while the right hand fired off sparks and fistfuls of notes, and there was frequently a vocal. The title refers to the lubricious undercurrent in the blues throughout its history and is a reference to the famous Mae West line: "Is that a pickle in your pocket, or are you just glad to see me?" Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Otis Spann.
@089 Blues Plane and Simple. A shuffle blues which is an excellent illustration of the principle of call-and-response. Notice how Butler sets up the first part, the call, by repeating a figure, then responds to it. Also notice how pervasive the triplet figure is, both in the shuffle of the boogie bass and in the right hand figures. Butler offers one of his harmonically surprising codas here. The chord movement goes from a Bb7, which we expect to return to the tonic F. Instead he goes to Ab sus (a GbMaj7 chord over Ab in the bass), then to Db7, Dsus, G7, Csus-each of these for four beats, then Bbsus for three and C7 for one, back to F for the final ending pattern. Try it; then transpose it to other keys. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Charlie Patton.
@090 Santa Monica Breeze. Put on your cocktail dresses and white jackets, this tune will bring you back to the elegant days overlooking the calm waters of the bay, or out on the deck of the Love Boat at dusk. This is what the piano is tinkling over at the bar. Is this the name of a tune or a drink?. Anyway, this style will delight the stylish set: easy stride with chordal right hand and a melody which oozes nostalgia. The style is full, but notice how often Butler is not playing full chords in the right hand: passing octaves, tremolos of less than an octave, single note passages. Also watch closely how he fattens up the sound by sliding onto chords from black keys to white keys. Also watch how he relieves the stride with broken octaves or tenths, or by doubling the melody in the right hand. The mood is relaxed, the impression is one of facility, but there's a lot of technique which goes into it. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Ray Charles.
@091 Shuffle the Cards. An up tempo boogie shuffle that starts out with a simple chordal right hand melody and single position boogie pattern, which turns into a fancy series of blues licks over a moving broken octave left hand pattern. A rousing, high energy piece, requiring a considerable degree of hand independence. Difficulty level: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Fats Domino.
@092 Silver Bullet Special. A fast shuffle blues boogie, which has traditionally evoked trains and railroad life. Upbeat in mood, this is a sure crowd-pleaser. Notice the call and response pattern Butler briefly creates by playing in different ranges in quick succession during the improvised section. The right hand is mostly in chords. Difficulty level: 4. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Jelly Roll Morton.
@093 Soybean Blues. A slow, wailing blues, evoking all the pathos of the Mississippi delta, fields, shacks, floods and towns without electricity. The tremolos and repeated hollow chords say it all; the rest is merely elaboration. The head uses a slow moseying bass, which counting in 6/8, plays notes on the first and sixth beat of each sextuplet. Then the accompanying rhythm increases as Butler goes into the improv section, with broken chords in the bass and notes on the 1, 3, 4 and 6. Level of difficulty: 1. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of John Lee Hooker.
@094 Sussman Blues. This blues was named for its heavy reliance on sus chords (no, there is no Mr. Sussman), which give it a fresh, contemporary sound. The chord pattern is slightly unconventional: Fsus to F7 for four bars, then Ebsus to Eb7 for four, then back to Fsus to F7 for four more, then Bbsus to Bb7 for two and Csus to C7 for two as the turnaround, and we're back to the beginning. The piece is filled with the blues language, so there's no mistaking it as a blues, albeit an upbeat, lighthearted one. The rhythm is slightly unconventional. It might remind you of a shuffle, but it has significant differences: it's slower, and the beats are divided into a dotted quarter and a sixteenth note, rather than the first and third notes of a triplet, as in a shuffle. The dotted rhythm keeps the forward motion going very strongly, even at the slower tempo. Since this piece was recorded as an overdub, learn the left hand as an accompaniment pattern from the "Lessons" section-if you need to-first, before putting the hands together. Having this type of rhythmic feel in your repertoire can add life to your sets and will make your listeners sit up and take notice. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Herbie Hancock.
@095 Two O'Clock Blues. A joyous, straight-eighth boogie in Bb displaying a good standard inventory of right-hand devices against a relentlessly repeating 1-5, 1-6, 1-b7 bass. We recorded it at 2 p. m. , hence the name. This is the kind of basic boogie that will endear you to your fans and get them dancing. Butler offers several of them in the program in several different keys. It's a good idea to learn basic patterns like this one in at least six keys: C, F, G, Bb, Eb, and Ab. The minor keys you'll mostly have to deal with are Cm, Fm, Gm, Dm, Am, and Em. Level of difficulty: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of T-Bone Walker.
@096 Under the Fig Tree. Although this blues begins with a device very similar to that which opens "Desire Under the El" and "Looking Up from the Gutter"-the measure full of triplet chords-its mood is distinctly upbeat. It is a medium tempo shuffle blues with some fancy single-note passage work (based on the blues scale) framing the assertive triplet statements. One of the lesser known pleasures (to outsiders) of New Orleans is the relative commonness of fig trees. The fruits mature in June, and those with the trees can't give the fruit away fast enough. Those without are only too willing to take it. For the rest of the summer, the very broad (and provocative) leaves of the tree provide welcome shade. Note the extended coda. Difficulty level: 3. Pianist: Henry Butler. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@097 Stompin' Blues, is played in Am. It's a Chicago style blues, with heavily syncopated left hand, and right hand keeping steady '4' in the bar' chording when not soloing . Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of BB King.
@098 Early Blues, is played with a straight-eighth feel in the key of  F. It's a Chicago blues with  New Orleans feel, using the characteristic rolls of Professor Longhair. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Professor Longhair.
@099 Captain of Memphis, is played in a Memphis blues (almost rock 'n roll)  style. This way of playing was made famous by the great Memphis Slim who lived in Paris for most of his adult life.  Although he wasn't really appreciated in Chicago or Memphis, he did get a lot of recognition in Paris. It features a steady '4 in the bar' left hand style throughout, playing from the 5,6 to b7 along with the root. Performed by Doc FingersPicture of Memphis Slim.
@100 The Everyway Blues,  is a swing shuffle in C which has a characteristic left hand riff going from root to seventh to fifth, with each note being repeated (C-C-  C-C Bb-Bb G-G).  It's played in the straight ahead blues shuffle style of  BB King,  Howling Wolf or other Chicago style players. Performed by Doc Fingers. Picture of BB King.
@101 I'm The One, is performed in the key of C in swing tempo. It is a slow Chicago blues, featuring the solid left hand pattern going from the root&5th to root&6th. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Tuts Washington.
@102 The Right Turn Blues, is played in the key of C with a swing feel. This has a forties and fifties early Rhythm and Blues feel which is derived from players like Louie Jordan. Steady left hand playing a shuffle riff from 5 to 6, with a turnaround on bar 11 and 12. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Louis Armstrong.
@103 Trouble Blues, is played in G with a swing feel. It's  a Chicago or Delta blues based on tunes like 'Trouble In Mind'. Notice the use of the diminished chord. Performed by Doc FingersPicture of Albert Ammons.
@104 Mystery Groove, is played in D with a New York blues feel or Memphis "train" shuffle groove. The group called  The Band inspired this type of feel. Syncopated rhythm also characteristic of Prof. Lonhgair. Performed by Doc Fingers.Picture of Professor Longhair.
@105 Blues in C was written by Larry Fuller. This trio version of the blues features many of the stylistic elements of pianists such as Phineas Newborn and Bud Powell. The intro and ending use a series of descending whole-tone dominant 7ths. Note the double octaves at bar 70.   Key of C. Performed by: Larry Fuller. Picture of Charlie Parker.
@106 Jay's Blues was written by Oliver Gannon.  This solo Bb blues is arranged  in "shot" style (i.e. melody followed by a shot etc.). In the blowing choruses the left hand provides a constant walking bass in the Dave McKenna, Monty Alexander style. Key of Bb. Performed by: Miles Black. Picture of Oliver Gannon.
@107 Jigger of Gin, is a straight-eighths version of a blues in F. 'Barbados', 'Perhaps' and 'Bossa Blues' are examples of this. Notice the unusual number of Maj7 chords in this rendition. The comping and bass lines are performed in the styles of Kenny Barron and Paul Chambers respectively. The key is F. Picture of Miles Black.
@108 Sadly You Sigh, demonstrates a straight-eighth minor blues played as a  Bossa. This minor blues progression is found in tunes like  'Mr. P.C.', 'The Five Spot after Dark', and 'The thrill is Gone'.   The comping features some of the lush, dense harmonies of Mulgrew Miller with a soft, soul Bossa bass line. The key is Cm.Picture of Charlie Parker.
@109 Less Than Greek. This is a standard straight-eighth blues progression which appears in tunes like 'Perhaps', 'Now's the Time' and 'Tenor Madness'. The comping is in the style of Gene Harris with the bass line paying tribute to the Ray Brown, John Clayton school. The key is Bb. Picture of Bill Evans.
@110 Scorpio. Tunes like 'Sidewinder', 'Now's the Time' and 'Billie's Bounce' can be performed with this straight-eighths funky approach. Notice this 12 bar blues has been expanded to 24 bars. Horace Silver is the inspiration for the comping which remains purposefully consistent. The bass line emulates the 60' Blue Note style of players like Reggie Workman. The key is C. Picture of Miles Black.
@111 Silent Shore. This is a straight-eighth progression, performed here with a loose 'ECM' approach. The comping is in the fluid style of Keith Jarrett and the bass line emulates the melodic and varied approach of Gary Peacock. Tunes like 'Blue in Green', 'Falling Grace' and 'Stella by Starlight' share some of the chordal characteristics found here. The key is Dm. Picture of George Shearing.
@112 Blues Waltz One, is a blues waltz in G. Other similar blues waltzes are 'The Gravy Waltz', 'All Blues' and 'Blues to You' . The impressionistic comping is in the style of Bill Evans. The bass line provides a Paul Chambers loose feel. The key is G.Picture of Thelonius Monk.
@113 Just Sue. This is a minor blues waltz in the tradition of ' Afro Blue', 'Footprints' and 'Five Spot After Dark'. Herbie Hancock's dynamic and textural comping style is demonstrated here. The bass line is in the style of Ron Carter who always provides a rhythmic core. The key is Cm.Picture of Herbie Hancock.
@114 My Thrill. This jazz waltz is a 24 bar, Bb blues with some chordal variations which are shared by tunes like 'Killer Joe', 'Bloomdido' and 'West Coast Blues'. Note the use of blues fills in the comping which is played in the style of Wynton Kelly. The bass walks mainly in the lower register with a Paul Chambers approach. The key is Bb.Picture of Bill Evans.
@115 Cadillac Avenue Boogie owes its catchy descending shuffle figure in the left hand to Little Wille Littlefield, a latter day boogie woogie pianist who is best known for his 1949 recording of It's Midnight.  The bass gives the song a strong offbeat pulse.  The driving right hand that leads off the head and repeats throughout the song is a stock motif, also recognizable as a common blues guitar lick.  Cadillac Avenue Boogie is a 12-bar form, with an 8-bar bridge after six choruses leading into a strong rhythmic statement of the style setting up a return to the head and then playing out with a tagged ending.  The title of the song refers to the address of PG Music's head office.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of  F, Tempo=120. Picture of Jelly Roll Morton.
@116 Memories Of Jimmy Yancey is a tribute to Jimmy Yancey (1894 - 1951) who influenced the major boogie woogie artists, as recognized by Meadee Lux Lewis in his recording of Yancey Special.  The bass part blends stride and blues influences in a classic pattern adapted freely throughout blues, R&B and rock'n'roll - in 12/8 form in Fats Domino's Blueberry Hill, for example.  Yancey did not begin recording until 1939, and this song echoes his early records.  In typical Jimmy Yancey style, it focuses on the right hand improvisations, played over a repetitive and seldom changing bass pattern.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of  C, Tempo=114.  Picture of Meade Lux Lewis.
@117 Pinetop Smith, who inspired Improvisations On Pinetop, was the first artist to use the term boogie woogie in reference to a piano composition when he wrote Pinetops' Boogie Woogie in 1928.  His definitive opening statement leads off this tribute, and then is restated as a bridge into further improvisations at the 3rd and 8th choruses.  The improvisations are a virtuoso demonstration of the boogie woogie form.  Listen for the off-time effect at the start of the 5th chorus.  The bass part is a pure boogie woogie octave walk through the changes.  The recording of Pinetop's Boogie Woogie was not made by Smith. It was recorded by the classically trained daughter of a friend, as Pinetop could not play it up to speed.  He had to get special permission from the young woman's father, a preacher, who lifted his ban on playing "the devil's music" as a favour to his friend.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of  F, Tempo= 148. Picture of Michael Kaeshammer.
@118 Downtown Fever is a slow blues in the style of Memphis Slim, the downtown in the title refers to Paris, France.  That city's nightlife is world famous, not only for attractions like the Moulin Rouge, but also for its many blues clubs.  Because of the acceptance and recognition he found in Paris, Memphis Slim lived there for many years until his death in February of 1987.  The bass line and the groove are vintage slow blues in the Memphis Slim style.  The improvisations are firmly rooted in the blues scale, with an interesting dropped 7th harmonization ending the second chorus and setting up the deeper blues of the third chorus.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of C, Tempo=78.   Picture of Memphis Slim.
@119 Parkland Stomp is a straight-ahead stomp with an eighth-note feel driven by alternating 5ths and 6ths in the left hand.  Two 12-bar choruses establish a solid rhythm, laying the foundation for improvisations in the style of the late Roosevelt Sykes.  His song Rock It inspired this one, and also informed the piano style of many later blues and rock'n'roll players.  Parkland Stomp is in standard 12-bar form, with an 8-bar bridge after six choruses playing back into a final statement of the head, which is then played out by a double tag.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of  Eb, Tempo=118.Picture of John Lee Hooker.
@120 Walkin' With The Boogie is an upbeat tune inspired by Taj Mahal.  The walking bass has a detached feel, with the emphasis on beats 2 and 4 rather than 1 and 3.  It's a fun style, as evidenced by the carefree improvisations in the right hand, well-suited to washboard or other percussion accompaniment.  The song takes some interesting liberties with the standard 12-bar form.  The first chorus substitutes a IIm-IV resolution for the usual IIm-V at bar 10.  There are interesting variations on common bass lines at bar 18 and bar 58.  An 8-bar bridge is inserted after the third chorus, a double ending on the last chorus leads into a coda, where two false endings keep up the playful spirit and then resolve in a textbook example of a blues closing.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of C, Tempo= 126. Picture of Jelly Roll Morton.
@121 Movin' Legs pays homage to the unique "junky" piano style of Champion Jack Dupree.  Dupree settled in Germany after leaving New Orleans in search of racial tolerance and lived out his life there. Michael Kaeshammer adopted this style after hearing Champion Jack in concert in Schweinfurt, Bavaria.  A slow triplet-based groove is laid down in two 8-bar choruses, these are expanded to the 12-bar form for another three choruses.  The left hand is steady, but loose enough to allow a wide range of expression in the right hand.   Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of F,  Tempo= 71. Picture of Micheal Kaeshammer.
@122 A new addition to the "cow" genre, Moo Cow Boogie is a 12-bar boogie in C over solid left hand eighth notes in the style of Albert Ammons .  It demonstrates a wide varietey of right hand licks that have been assimilated into many other idioms, by jazz greats like Count Basie and Lionel Hampton, rock'n'roll players like Little Richard, Fats Domino and Jerry Lee Lewis, and soul artists like Ray Charles and Booker T.  The key of C, with no sharps or flats, was the key favoured by the boogie woogie originators.  Listen at bars 28 and 80 for examples of how effective playing against the beat in the right hand can be.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of C, Tempo= 126. Picture of Albert Ammons.
@123 Another Night is another example of the widely adapted Jimmy Yancey "barrelhouse" left hand.  British jazz pianist Monty Alexander is just one modern artist who has been influenced by Jimmy Yancey, he is credited here as the inspiration for the improvisations in the right hand.  We see how the influence of a pioneer has been passed on and is now enriching the work of an emerging artist.  In typical Yancey style the bass figure sustains a constant, bouncy rhythm throughout.  It is varied only in the 8-bar bridge after the fifth chorus.  The ending is tagged and played out with a richly embellished final progression.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of Eb, Tempo= 140. Picture of Michael Kaeshammer.
@124 The lively Boogie Nights is firmly rooted in rhythm, taking its inspiration from Dr. John. (Dr. John is Mac Rebennack)  The left hand lays down a constant shuffle pattern to support fluent improvisations that give full rein to the whole bag of blues licks.  The fundamental rhythm that drives this piece is periodically reinforced by a return to a two-handed rhythmic vamp, as in the fourth chorus, that serves to launch another round of  ornate right hand licks worthy of the Dr. himself.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of G, Tempo=170.Picture of Jerry Lee Lewis.
@125 Houserockin' features the classic rolling bass line attributed to Albert Ammons who, along with Pete Johnson and Meadee Lux Lewis, created the Boogie Woogie style in the 1930s.  The bass line reiterates the tonic and fifth as eighth notes on beats one and three, rolling up to the third on beat two and rolling over on the sixth on beat four to return to the start and repeat the figure.  This is a fundamental left hand style found in songs like Boogie Woogie Stomp and Boogie Woogie Blues.  It is often embellished or altered, but never abandons the basic left hand figure that has set a lot of houses rocking.  The melodic figures are not complex, but play off the upbeat rhythm to reinforce the goodtime feeling of this song as it rocks through eight choruses to a tongue-in-cheek ending.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of  C, Tempo=139.Picture of Meade Lux Lewis.
@126 All Boogie is based on a Pete Johnson style, a member of the famed trio of boogie woogie greats along with Albert Ammons and Meadee Lux Lewis.  The left hand dominates this song.  It is a standard 12-bar form, but the walking bass in the left hand demonstrates how the basic pattern can be varied.  The first chorus establishes a solid left hand line playing a fundamental boogie pattern, with the right hand doing little more than comping.  The right hand takes over until the left hand improvisations at the sixth and ninth choruses, where the right hand returns to playing rhythm on the offbeats.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of Bb, Tempo= 138.Picture of Albert Ammons.
@127 Michael Kaeshammer credits pianist Willie McCulloch of the Powder Blues Band as the inspiration for his feelgood shuffle, How Good Could You Feel?  The basic rhythm pattern is the bouncing left hand typical of Lonnie Mack's Kansas City and hundreds of other blues shuffles.  It loses none of its appeal in this performance, which begins by establishing an easy rhythmic groove to support a carefree melodic line and improvisations which illustrate that the blues can sometimes make you feel good, especially when jamming with good friends who "dig your groove".  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of G, Tempo=120.  Picture of Michael Kaeshammer.
@128 Although based on the style of Big Willie Maven, originator of the Chicago style, which he called blues and boogie on a jazz kick, New Orleans influences are much in evidence in Walkin' On The Boogie Side.  The left hand is syncopated throughout, with the fourth chorus focused on bass variations under a sustained trill in the right hand.  The right hand improvisations are played in the middle range of the piano, and take their inspiration from the New Orleans style of Professor Longhair.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of C, Tempo= 126. Picture of Professor Longhair.
@129 Big Joe Duskin is the inspiration for Sand In My Shoes.  The shuffle rhythm in the left hand is typical of his playing, as in his version of the boogie classic Down The Road A Piece.  Duskin is another of the old-time boogie woogie players who found a following among the many fanatical devotees of the form in Europe.  He lives, and is still active, in Paris.  After two 12-bar choruses of the head, the right hand departs to explore the full range of the keyboard in improvisations.  There is particular emphasis on the upper register, beginning with the fourth chorus, finally working back to the middle register and into the ending, which returns to the V chord twice and then quotes the familiar Count Basie phrase to end.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of F, Tempo= 132.Picture of Kenny Barron.
@130 Boogie In "Gee" takes two compositions by Big Maceo Merriweather as its source, Chicago Breakdown and Texas Stomp.  Merriweather was born in Texas in 1905 and died in Chicago in 1953.  He was noted more as a blues player, but these two boogie woogie tunes were much imitated by later players.  The bass pattern demonstrates that boogie woogie left hands do not have to be totally repetitive.  There are many interesting variations in the later choruses that are worthy of study.  The right hand is generally melodic, with limited use of blues notes.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of G, Tempo= 140. Picture of Memphis Slim.
@131 This tribute to Duke Ellington takes as its starting point the eighth-note bass riff for Ellington's boogie woogie arrangement of the swing standard Sing, Sing, Sing.  The opening chorus on that pattern serves as the departure point for a ten chorus romp through the 12-bar boogie form, returning to Ellington's riff to end this Tribute To The Duke.  The bass line supporting the right hand is characterized by steady eighth notes with the tonic on the offbeats.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of C, Tempo=173. Picture of Duke Ellington.
@132 The playing of Speckled Red is the basis for Rolf's Boogie, Michael Kaeshammer's tribute to his father, who introduced him to the boogie form when Michael was 13 years old.  This is a 12-bar boogie, with a 4-bar break at the start and again after alternate choruses leading back into a new chorus, starting on the IV chord.  The bass is a standard eighth note pattern of 5ths and 6ths over a pedaled tonic, varied by breaks into a walking bass at bars 50 and 74.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of G, Tempo= 145.Picture of Michael Kaeshammer.
@133 When The Saints Boogie. This shuffle boogie is in key of C. The steady shuffle bass line in octaves maintains throughout the piece. This makes it a good study for left hand octave patterns.  Pianist:  Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of F, Tempo= 141. Picture of Louis Armstrong.
@134 Goodnight Boogie is propelled along by a strong, straight-8 bass beat that plays as a rhythm section under the right hand improvisations.  The right hand begins rhythmically, then it expands into varied blues and melodic motifs.  At bar 100 the right hand plays against the rhythm before returning to the form and heading into a lingering ending which builds in tension as it repeats five times, taking 20 bars to say goodnight.  Pianist: Michael Kaeshammer.  Key of Bb, Tempo= 136. Picture of Buddy Guy.
@
