@076 Mozart Bass. This is a beautiful example in sixteenth notes of the flowing Mozart bass accompaniment technique. As you play, try to bring out the melodic bass line which is formed by the leading notes of each group. The melody which goes with this is "The Alphabet Song", so once you learn the left hand, you should try putting in the melody on top!

@077 Melody in Left Hand.  Open up the notation window and practise the right hand rhythm by itself. If you're used to "straight" playing, you'll be surprised at how hard it is to get your left hand to play even the simple melody from "Baa Baa Black Sheep".  Playing a round of the melody in the bass is an effective way to give interest and variety to an arrangement. It works especially well with Gospel songs, because it reminds you of that one guy in every  Gospel band who sings with an incredibly deep voice!

@078 Arpeggios in Left Hand. An arpeggio is a run of notes taken from a single chord which spans a distance too great for the hand to cover without moving (as opposed to "broken chords"). Notice how the notes in the first four bars, all from the C major chord, range over an interval of more than two octaves. This example, from "Bicycle Built for Two, contains, some interesting melodic accents in the bass line between bars six and eight, in effect creating some nice passing harmonies. Around half-way through the lesson, the melody enters, played mostly in octaves. Learn the left hand first, and then try to add the melody in single notes.

@079 Melody in 6ths. In this passage from "My Darlin' Clementine", the right hand plays most of the melody mostly in parallel 6ths. This harmoniziation gives the melody a rich, warm, peaceful feeling, which is enhanced by the use of tremolo in a couple of places. Don't lock your hand into a fixed position and bang out the sixths using just the thumb and fifth finger - you might get away with that in the key of C, but this exercise is purposely set in Db (the key  much loved by Chopin) so that you'll explore the different hand positions that can be used as the melody flows from one diad to another, sometimes on two black notes, sometimes with a black on top and a white on the bottom, etc. In general, you should use the 4th and 5th fingers for the upper note, and the thumb and index fingers for the lower note. Towards the end of the lesson, the waltz style accompaniment joins in so you can try playing the melody along with the rhythm. 

@080 Pedal Points (Ostinatto). A pedal point is a repeated note which is repeated over and over while the harmonies are changing. In "Cradle Song" the use of the pedal suggests a hypnotic, trance-like feeling. With this melodly, a D pedal would work theoretically as well as an A pedal, but with a somewhat different emotional content. Try it and see for yourself which you like better! 

@081 Embellishments: Trills. This example shows how to stretch out a note using a trill. Open up the notation window and see how, in the second-last bar of the phrase, you roll back and forth between the E and the F# as fast as you can using the 2nd and 3rd fingers of the right hand. (The fingers are  numbered from one to five starting with the thumb). It's a very classical-sounding technique, and the purists will tell you that you're not supposed to begin a trill on the melody note but on the note ABOVE. Another tip: notice the use of chords with the 3rd in the bass ( G over B and D over F#). It's important on those chords to avoid repeating the bass note with the right hand - that's why you see nothing but open fourths and fifths in the right hand for those beats.

@082 Broken Chords in Left Hand. If the left hand in this example is a little to hard for you, why not try to play the melody by ear while the accompaniment plays along?  In this example, taken from "Jack and Jill", the harmony changes on almost every beat, and the chords are broken up using a variety of different rhythmic "templates", including an effective downward run in staccato notes that gives the phrase a definite sense of completion.

@083 Alternating Bass. In order for a song arrangement to work well on the piano, it usually needs three things: melody, rhythm & harmony, and bass line. The simplest way to get all these working together is for the right hand to play melody, the left hand to play bass, and the middle hand to play rhythm. Unfortunately, for some reason many piano players are unable to master this technique, and the rhythm/harmony duties end up getting shared between the left and right hands, with the left hand usually getting most of the work. In this example, taken from "Little Brown Jug", the left hand does nothing but play the bass line. It works here because the bunched chords in the melody line add almost all the rhythm and harmony that the song needs, and the bouncy alternating bass line does the rest. The "dotted rhythms" in the bass line help to give it punch, and there is a nice example of a five-note walking line from the F to the Bb. And notice how at the ends of bars 6 and 13, the Eb "rolls" into the F.

@084 Embellishments: Turns. A turn is a melodic decoration of shorter duration than a trill. The on-screen notation window shows only the basic melody - see if you can pick out by ear exactly what has been added to the printed notes in this example.

@085 Syncopation: This exercise, taken from "Hush Little Baby", is like a little dance for the fingers of the right hand. "Syncopation" means that the rhythmic accents are shifted ahead of their normal positions. Try tapping your foot a steady four-to-the-bar while you play this melody, and you'll see how it keeps coming in just ahead of the beat. The lesson gets faster and faster as it goes along, so stay alert!

@086 Jazz Chords. Pianist Miles Black really takes advantage of his jazz harmonies in this sensitive arrangement of "Little Boy Blue". Just a few points can be observed in this short excerpt. Jazz makes extensive use of added note chords, building on top of the 1-3-5 triad by addin the seventh, ninth, eleventh, and thirteenth notes of the scale. Notice how much richness of sound we get by adding a B (the major 7th) to the C chord on the word "under". Another technique is harmonic displacement. The melody for "after the sheep" would normally be harmonized by a 2-5-1 progression into G. That's A minor 7th, D 7th, and G. Here Miles has lowered the harmonization by three semitones, creating a MINOR 2-5-1 into Em. (Thats F#m7b5, B7, and Em). Another example: the Bb 13th. A common jazz technique is to move into a chord (in this case the Am7th) from a chord built on the semitone above. SInce it's a passing chord that only lasts for a single beat, you can get away with dissonances that would otherwise sound kind of harsh!

@087 Alberti Bass (slow). This example of Alberti ("Mozart") Bass is taken from Home Sweet Home. It is played in eighth notes in the key of Eb. (The same figure could be doubled in tempo and played in 16th notes.) Try to play just the left hand. The melody cuts out after the first time round, and returns softly around half-way through the lesson. Remember to go lightly on the repeated Bb notes.

@088 Rhythmic Bass. This walking bass line is taken from "Mary Had a Little Lamb". To make the on-screen notation a little easier to read, the notes are transposed an octave up from where they are actually played. The dotted rhythms give the song a lively bounce, and should be played with spirit. 

@089 Triads. The melody for "Mary Had a Little Lamb" is harmonized with simple triads. In this exercise, you should try to play the melody from memory in time with the chord changes. Then play the chords together with the melody. Notice that the first time around, the chords are played in their basic "1-3-5" positions. The second time around, the C chord is played in its first inversion, with an added 7th. You can see how this improves the "voice leading" in the left hand - the notes move by only a semi-tone each!

@090 Country Style. This example, taken from "On Top of Old Smokey", illustrates the country style "bent note" piano method. It is actually an imitation of the guitar "hammer on", and most often is used to decorate the third note of the scale. You can see it clearly in the last beat of bar 4 (on the word "and"). Note how the melody note, an F#, is rolled into from a full tone below. Contrast this with typical jazz style grace notes, which slide into the melody note from the nearest semi-tone. The A-note, in addition to combining with the E in a "bare fourth" voicing typical of country piano, also provides a ringing pedal tone above the melody. You can see this again in bar 15.

@091 Chorale Voicing. Sometimes the piano is most effective when playing solid chord voicings much the same way they would be sung in a choir. The on-screen notation for "My Country 'Tis of Thee" has been spread out into its four voices - first the bass line, then the tenor and alto joining in, and finally the melody. Try getting some friends together to learn each of the four parts - then sing them all together in harmony! 

@092 Dotted Eighth Notes. The rhythm of this melody is actually a triplet feel, with the duration of the dotted eighths being around 66% of the beat. True dotted rhythms, where the beat is divided 75/25, are a rarity in folk or popular music because they sound too "clipped". Try to sight-read along with the melody line in the notation window.  Around half-way through the exercise, the rhythm notation appears. It is a simple "bounce" accompaniment with alternating bass. See if you can put it together with the melody.

@093 Stride Accompaniment (Basic). This is a simple stride-style accompaniment taken from "Hush Little Baby". The trick here is to get the left hand moving back and forth in perfect rhythm. No sustain pedal is used here,  because  the short, punchy notes give the song its bounce. Learn this style well and you'll get a LOT of mileage out of it!  Note how the G7 chord is decorated by the addition of a flat ninth - you might also try adding an A to the C chord (added 6th)!  Another point to observe in this passage is the use of octaves in the right hand. The added fifth in the middle of the octave gives the melody a kind of "Errol Garner" feel. And the way the pianist slides into the fifth from the adjacent black note is very typical of that style of playing. (For a REAL good example of Errol Garner's style, check out Polly Wolly Doodle from around bar 62!)

@094 Vamping.  "Vamping" when the right get together and play just rhythm with no melody. It's a lot easier than "stride" playing because the left hand doesn't have to make those big jumps to reach the chord punches on beats 2 and 4. So the right hand tends to get a little more invovled rhythmically. And notice the use of grace notes in the left hand to give the bass line more "zip".  In this collection, "vamping" is used as kind of a breathing space between choruses of a song, especially when the song is about to modulate up by a semitone.  But it's actually ideal for sing-along accompaniment for just about any kind of music. With different bass styles and right hand chording rhythms, you can create just about any feel, and you're not responsible for getting the melody right!

@095 Stride Accompaniment (With Tenths). This is an advanced example of real jazz stride accompaniment. The walking tenths in the left hand call for quite a stretch, but there's just no other way to get quite the same sound out of the old piano. Taken from "Hush Little Baby".

@096 Broken Chords in Right Hand. This example is taken from the Alphabet Song. Open the notation window and sight-read along with the right hand part. The rapid sixteenth notes  create a smooth, flowing effect. The broken chords should be played with a soft touch, allowing the melody notes to be brought forward with clarity.
A good exercise in ear training is to pick out the bass notes by ear in this example.