{The Children's Pianist -- Memos  -- 75 songs}

@001 Tom, Tom, the Piper's Son. Beginning with the god Pan, the pipe has always seemingly possessed magical qualities, (as in the 'Pied Piper of Hamelin'). The name Tom has traditionally been associated with pipers.  

@002 Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star. This nursery rhyme was written and published in 1806 by Ann and Jane Taylor who were  well-known writers of nursery stories. The music which is the same as that of 'Baa, Baa, 
Blacksheep', comes from Mozart's adaptation of an old French tune. 

@003 Yankee Doodle. This American nursery rhyme dates back to pre-revolution times. British soldiers used to sing it to ridicule the backwoodsmen of New England. When the British were defeated the tune was proudly sung by Americans.

@004 Oh Dear, What Can the Matter Be. This song, first published in the late 1700's, was probably originally sung to children in the nursery by their Nanny's. 

@005 Take Me Out To the Ballgame. This tune is considered to be the anthem of Baseball.  In the 2nd chorus the piano changes from a simple approach to a left-hand waltz stride. For those interested in developing stride piano technique, this is an excellent way to start. Remember, you can slow any of these pieces down.

@006 The Farmer in the Dell. This tune dates back to the middle ages. It was originally called 'The Farmer In The Den'. A den or dell is a clearing in the woods. A game is played while singing this song where children join hands and dance in a circle. With each new verse, the circle grows larger.

@007 Three Blind Mice. Along with 'Row, Row, Row Your Boat', this is probably one of the most well-known rounds. A round is a musical invention whereby the tune can be played or sung by different instrumentalists or voices with staggered entrances. For example: in this tune, the first 2 bars of the melody is stated by the first voice. When the first voice gets to bar 3 the second voice enters from the beginning, and so on.

@008 Three Little Kittens. Like many of these pieces, this tune begins with a simple piano arrangement. It  is played in a 12/8 meter. The left hand plays a simple arpeggio behind the melody. 

@009 This Old Man. This is a marching tune. It is also a children's counting song. It begins in the key of C and modulates up in half steps to the key of E. As in many of these pieces, there is an interlude between choruses.

@010 Ten Little Indians. This is another counting song and game. While singing the first verse, children appear suddenly one by one, in a hopping fashion. In the second verse they disappear one by one in the same way. 

@011 Little Cock Sparrow. A simple, plaintive tune sung or played in a gentle and melancholy waltz tempo.

@012 Little Bo Peep. 'Bo Peep' is an old term referring to a child's game of peek-a-boo. It also refers to a form of hide-and-seek. This nursery rhyme, one of the most readily recognized, dates back to the early 1800's.  

@013 Simple Simon. Dating back to Elizabethan times, this nursery rhyme refers to Simple Simon, which meant at the time, a 'silly or simple-minded fellow'.

@014 Skip To My Loo. This is a traditional and lively dance tune. It first made its appearance around 1855.

@015 Billy Boy. This tune tells the  story of a mother 's advice to her son on what to look for as he goes off into the world to seek a wife.

@016 Itiskit, Itasket. This tune was a hit record for Ella Fitzgerald, in the forties, under the title  'A Tisket, A Tasket'. It was originally written as a game song. With children in a circle, the words 'I dropped it' are sung, and a child drops a handkerchief ('letter') behind another child. That child picks it up and runs around the circle and drops it behind another child. This keeps going until all have had a turn. 

@017 Old King Cole. This 17th century rhyme refers to a merchant named Cole who employed around 500 people. His employees referred to this apparently happy fellow by the nickname of 'Old King Cole'.   

@018 Patacake. Dating back to the late 1600's, this rhyme, traditionally, is usually one of baby's first songs. It is often played by mother or other person, and baby, clapping hands together and making a game of it.

@019 Ring Around a Rosey. First appearing in print in 1881, this rhyme supposedly makes referrence to the Great Plague.  The 'roses' refers to one of the symptoms of the plague, a rosey rash. It was thought that herbs and spices, ('posies') would offer protection from infection. 'Husha' or 'Hasha'  refers to the sneezing, a symptom which usually occurred before death.

@020 Alphabet Song. Dating back to the mid 1800's, this song is used to teach very young children their A-B-C's. It has sometimes been referred to, comically as the 'Abey Seedy' song.

@021 Little Boy Blue. The inspiration for this nursery rhyme came from two possible sources: A depiction of Cardinal Wolsey (Henry VIII's Lord Chancelor) who, as a boy, was the son of a butcher and possibly did tend his father's sheep; It has also been suggested that some of the lines come from Shakespeare's King Lear (Act III, scene VI).   

@022 Lavender Blue. Written in the late 17th century, this very popular nursery rhyme was featured in a Disney film, 'So Dear to My Heart', in 1948. It became a hit song as recorded by Dinah Shore.

@023 Jack Spratt. This rhyme dates back to the 1600's. Spratt or Prat was a common name for a dwarf. This rhyme possibly refers to a clergyman of very diminutive stature, Archdeacon Pratt and his wife Joan.

@024 Jack and Jill. This nursery rhyme dates back to the mid 1700's. For those of who need deeper meaning in their nursery rhymes, speculators have identified the two as Cardinal Wolsey and Bishop Tarbes who arranged the marriage of Mary Tudor to the King of France.

@025 Hush Little Baby. Often thought of as a lullaby, this rendition has a more jazz-swing feel. The  lyric tells of promises made to a child by 'Poppa'. It tells the child that if the first present doesn't work out another will promptly be provided. 
 
@026 Home, Home on the Range. Written in waltz tempo, this is an all time favorite 'Cowboy' or Western tune which is often sung around the campfire while one or more people  strum guitars.

@027 Georgie Porgie. This rhyme dates back to before 1850. There would seem to be several possible choices as to who Georgie really was; King George I, the Duke of Buckingham (George Villiers), or Charles III.

@028 My Grandfather's Clock. This is the story of a clock which supposedly had an almost human connection to its owner, and operated according to the daily life of the old man.

@029 Man on the Flying Trapeze. This tune is written in a 3/4 waltz tempo and the very descriptive lyric makes one get a feel for the moves of a trapeze artist. While singing it, people have been known to sway to and fro'.

@030 There Was A Crooked Man. Those who like to find deeper meaning in nursery rhymes have suggested that this simple rhyme in fact, refers to an agreement which secured political and religious freedom in Scotland in the 1600's. Supposedly, General Sir Alexander Leslie of Scotland was the 'crooked man',  the 'crooked sixpence' was Charles I, and the 'crooked stile' was the English-Scottish border.

@031 Bicycle Built For Two. This song in 3/4 time, is also known as 'Daisy, Daisy'. It first appeared around time of the introduction of the automobile.

@032 Allouette. This tune, about a lark or wren, is the most popular of all Canadian Folk songs. It arrived from France around 200 years ago. Even those who do not speak French find themselves easily singing along to its catchy lyric.

@033 Little Jack Horner. This nursery rhyme refers to Thomas Horner who's descendants still live in the Manor of Mells in Summerset, England.  Jack was a popular nickname in those times, often referring to a knave or  rogue. Thomas (Jack) was asked to deliver a Christmas gift, a pie which contained the title deeds of twelve manors. Jack stole one of these (the Manor of Mells), and kept it for himself.

@034 Looby Loo. This traditional and lively old tune is sung while children dance around doing the choreography as described in each verse of the lyrics.

@035 London Bridge. This rhyme possibly refers to the destruction of London Bridge by Norsemen lead by King Olaf in the 11th century. Traditionally, the game played while singing this rhyme involves pairs of children holding hands high to form a bridge.

@036 I've Been Working On the Railroad. This work song has it's roots in the early American railroad and lumberjack camps. It is typically sung around the campfire and at parties.

@037 Do Your Ears Hang Low, is a comical, 'can't miss' tune which is often sung around the fire at camp, at sing-a-longs, hootenannies and other gatherings.

@038 Star Spangled Banner, the national anthem of the United States, was written by Francis Scott Key around 1815. His inspiration for the song was in seeing the American flag still waving, the morning after the British attacked Fort McHenry in Baltimore Harbor during the war of 1812.

@039 Dixie. The Old South was fondly referred to  as 'Dixie'. This is another of the 'home' tunes, along with 'Home Sweet Home' and 'Old Folks at Home'.  

@040 Dickory, Dickory Dock. This rhyme, often known as 'Hickory, Dickory Dock' dates back to the middle 1700's. It implies through words and music, the ticking of a grandfather clock. 

@041 My Darlin' Clementine. This song, is believed to be an old miner's song, tells the story of the unfortunate happenings to the daughter of a miner. 

@042 Sing a Song of Sixpence. According to 16th century cookbooks, live birds were sometimes used in baking a certain pie, which, when cut, would allow them to fly out in spectacular fashion. 

@043 She'll Be Coming 'Round the Mountain. Along with songs like 'I've Been Working on the Railroad', this well-known ditty has its roots in the 19th century, in American lumberjack and railroad work camps.

@044 Row, Row, Row Your Boat. This song is usually sung as a round. A round is a musical invention whereby the tune can be played or sung by different voices or instrumentalists with staggered entrances. For example: in this tune, the first bar of the melody is stated by the first voice. When the first voice gets to bar 2 the second voice enters from the beginning, and so on.

@045 See Saw Margery Daw. This rhyme is usually sung by children playing on a see-saw. In the 1700's the word 'Daw' referred to an untidy person, while Margery was a name used by poor country folk. 

@046 Santa Lucia, is a famous old Italian folk song. One can almost hear the sound of water lapping as a gondola cruises up and down the canals of Venice on a warm, moonlit night.

@047 Sing a Song at Twilight, was written by J. L. Malloy. This very pleasing and descriptive waltz evokes a feeling of the tranquillity of an evening in the late 1800's.

@048 Rockaby Baby. Sometimes known as Hushabye Baby, this is certainly one of the oldest and most familiar of all lullabies. In olden days it was customary to hang a baby's cradle on the bough of a tree to be rocked by the wind.

@049 Pop Goes the Weasel. Some say that this thyme refers to the pawning of one's belongings as the money runs short. As with most nursery rhymes, this is only one of many interpretations by 'rhyme scholars'.

@050 Ride a Cock Horse. The 'fine lady' referred to here is possibly Elizabeth I. It has also been suggested that the subject was noblewoman Celia Fiennes who lived in a castle near Banbury and who was known as an avid horseback rider. In the 1400's there was a custom of attaching bells to the pointed toes of shoes. 

@051 Polly Wolly Doodle All the Day. The banjo would be a very fitting accompaniment for this old American folk song of the South. Notice the great rhythm achieved by the lyrics: i.e. 'Goin' to L'ousiana, for to see my Suzyanna'.        

@052 Polly Put the Kettle On. Polly and Sukey were nicknames for Mary and Susan in the late 17th century which is when this well-known rhyme first appeared.

@053 Pierot. This tune, originally in French, is one of the oldest of the French-Canadian folk songs. It was handed down from the Voyageurs and Habitants who were among the earliest explorers and settlers of Canada.

@054 On Top Of Old Smokey. This well known waltz, a tale of sadness and lost love, is played with a 3/4 time 'stride' left hand. In this pianistic technique, the left hand plays a bass note, followed by two chords. 

@055 Old MacDonald is a perennial favorite. Very young children are able to learn about the sounds animals make by singing the verses and acting out the parts. 

@056 Old Folks at Home. This is considered to be one of Stephen Foster's best-known songs. Along with 'Home Sweet Home', (which was written by Sir Henry Bishop), it is one of the most beloved themes of 'home'. It is also sometimes called 'Way Down Upon the Swanee River'.

@057 Oh Where, Oh Where Has My Little Dog Gone. This rhyme was written as a comic ballad in 1864 by Septimus Winner, a Philadelphia publisher and critic.

@058 Oh Susanna. Another famous Stephen Foster composition of the Old South, this one talks about a country fellow's efforts to travel from Alabama, home to Louisiana to see his girl, Susanna.

@059 My Old Kentucky Home. This well-known American tune was written by Stephen Foster in the mid 1800's, around the time Harriet Beecher Stowe's 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' was first published in 1851.

@060 Mulberry Bush. This nursery rhyme dates back to the late 1800's and is usually sung during a children's game where everyone holds hands and dances around in a circle.

@061 Mary Had a Little Lamb. Supposedly based on fact, this nursery rhyme, which is probably the best known of all, was written by Sarah Joseph Hale in 1830, in Boston.

@062 Little Brown Jug, is an old traditional song. It was re-introduced in the early forties, as a famous big band arrangement and recording by the Glenn Miller Orchestra. His arrangement of the piece is still widely played the world over.

@063 I'll Give to You. This rhyme is from an old traditional song of betrothal and dates back to the early 1800's. Certain verses are sung from the man's point of view and alternated with those of the woman.

@064 Humpty Dumpty. This ancient rhyme is known throughout Europe in various languages and in the same form. In adult thinking, it sometimes refers to the rise and fall of political types. i.e.: Louisiana Governor Huey Long in the movie 'All the King's Men'.   

@065 Hot Cross Buns: Traditionally, Hot Cross Buns are eaten on Good Friday. In this rhyme, which is over 200 years old, the street crier is announcing his Holy, spiced cakes. 

@066 Home Sweet Home. This tune was written by Sir Henry Bishop. He reportedly pointed out that 'Every child should learn to sing the Home Songs of his country'.

@067 Hey Diddle Diddle. This is an ancient rhyme which probably dates to the early 1500's. 'Hey Diddle Diddle' was a new dance, according to Thomas Preston, usually accompanied by a tune on the fiddle. People who enjoy reading more meaning into nonsense rhymes have suggested that the cat is Elizabeth I and the dog is Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester whom she referred to as 'my little lap dog'. 

@068 Girls and Boys Come Out to Play. This rhyme sometimes begins with 'Boys and Girls ...' and dates to the early 1700's. The lyrics in this program were obtained from very earliest sources available. They have undergone many transformations over the years. Therefore, you may notice discrepancies from the modern day versions. This is also true for the music.

@069 Frere Jacques, is another famous French Canadian folk song. With the lyric in French, it asks the question - 'Are you sleeping, are you sleeping? brother John'. It is sung as a round with the next singers beginning the tune at the end of the second 'Frere Jacques', and so on, and so on.

@070 Ding Dong Dell. This tune was first introduced by John Land, an organist at Winchester Cathedral. The year was 1580.

@071 Cradle Song. Written by Johannes Brahms and known also as 'Brahm's Lullaby', this beautiful, soothing tune continues to be crooned to babies by mothers the world over. 

@072 Camptown Races. This song was written by the great American composer Stephen Foster in the 1800's. Along with 'Oh, Susanna' this nonsense tune is one of Foster's most famous. When published at 2 cents each it sold 5000 copies.

@073 Buttercups and Daisies is a traditional song. It is said that it was written to teach young children to appreciate and love the beauty of flowers. Years ago it was sung during 'Arbor Day' and 'May Day' celebrations.

@074 Baa, Baa, Blacksheep. In the late 1800's Rudyard Kipling wrote a story with the same title in which he used this rhyme. It dates back to the 1700's.  The music which is the same as that of  'Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star', comes from Mozart's adaptation of an old French tune. 

@075 America. Sung joyously and with pride, this is one of the most loved anthems written about the United States of America by Samuel F. Smith.
