@001 Berlin, Irving \Irving Berlin, b.  Tyumen, Russia, May 11, 1888, d.  Sept.  22, 1989, dominated the world of American popular music for half a century.  Of his over 1,500 songs, for which he wrote both music and lyrics, several have become classics.  Among them are "God Bless America," "White Christmas," "Easter Parade," "All Alone," and "Alexander's Ragtime Band." "White Christmas" won an Oscar in 1942.  Yip, Yip, Yaphank (1918) and This Is the Army (1942), musicals that he wrote and produced with all-soldier casts during the two world wars, earned millions for war charities.  For This Is the Army he was decorated with the Medal of Merit.  Screen musicals with Berlin's songs include Top Hat (1935), Easter Parade (1948), Blue Skies (1946), and White Christmas (1954).  Among his most successful Broadway musicals are the Music Box Revues (1921-24), As Thousands Cheer (1933), and Annie Get Your Gun (1946). 

Bibliography: Bergreen, Laurence, As Thousands Cheer: TheLife of Irving Berlin (1990);  Ewen, David, The Story of Irving Berlin (1950);  Freedlang, Michael, Irving Berlin (1976); Suskin, Steven, Show Tunes, 1905-1985 (1986);  Whitcomb, Ian, Irving Berlin and Ragtime America (1988);  Wilk, Max, They're Playing Our Song (1973);  Woollcott, Alexander, The Story of Irving Berlin (1925;  repr.  1982). 

@002 Blake, Eubie \Once a ragtime pianist, James Hubert "Eubie" Blake, b. Baltimore, Md., Feb. 7, 1883, d. Feb. 12, 1983, had a long career in popular music, primarily as a composer. Together with his longtime vaudeville partner, the songwriter Noble Sissle, Blake wrote the trend-setting musical Shuffle Along (1921), which became the most successful black show on Broadway, running for 504 performances. Two of his show tunes, "Memories of You" and "I'm Just Wild about Harry," became standards. Although he continued to work intermittently for many years, he was not "rediscovered" until 1969, when John Hammond produced the album The Eighty-Six Years of Eubie Blake. Blake later founded a record company and made a biographical film. The musical revue Eubie, featuring 24 of his songs, opened on Broadway in 1978. Five days before his death, Blake's 100th birthday was celebrated with gala performances of his music at Washington's Kennedy Center--the celebration was later televised nationally. ROGER BAILEY

Bibliography: Blesh, Rudi, Combo, U.S.A.: Eight Lives in Jazz(1971); Kimball, Robert, and Bolcom, William, Reminiscing with Sissle and Blake (1972); Rose, Al, Eubie Blake (1983). 

@003 Cohan, George M. \George Michael Cohan, b. Providence, R.I., July 3, 1878, d. Nov. 5, 1942, was an actor, singer, dancer, playwright, composer, director, and producer. He dominated the American theater at the beginning of the 20th century. 
As a child he appeared in his family's vaudeville act. The Four Cohans. At age 17 he was managing the act and writing vaudeville sketches and songs. His first full-length play, The Governor's Son, opened in New York in 1901. This fast-paced mixture of popular song, comedy, and melodrama set the standard for subsequent Cohan productions. Little Johnny Jones (1904) introduced two of Cohan's most enduring songs, "I'm a Yankee Doodle Dandy" and "Give My Regards to Broadway." Cohan was a patriot; his tunes "You're a Grand Old Flag" and "Over There" were World War I favorites. 
In 1923, Cohan took on a serious role as a second-rate variety performer in The Song and Dance Man. Ten years later he gave what many critics considered the finest performance of his career as Nat Miller in Eugene O'Neill's Ah, Wilderness! Cohan also appeared as Franklin Roosevelt in I'd Rather Be Right (1937). His autobiography, Twenty Years on Broadway and the Years It Took to Get There, appeared in 1925. A film (Yankee Doodle Dandy, 1942) and a Broadway musical (George M! 1968) were based on his life. ANDREW KELLY

Bibliography: Ewen, David, Great Men of American Popular Song(1970);  McCabe, J., George M.  Cohan (1973;  repr.  1980); Morehouse, Ward, George M.  Cohan:  Prince of the American Theater (1943;  repr.  1971). 
@004 Hunter, Charles\Charles Hunter ( Born:  Columbia, Tennessee, May 16, 1876 Died:  St. Louis, Missouri, January 23, 1906 ) Hunter Attended the School for the Blind in Nashville, where he was taught the trade of piano tuning.  He worked for the Jesse French Piano Company in Nashville, where he taught himself to play the piano and had his rags published.  He was transferred to the St. Louis branch of the French company, which he soon left for the easy life of the District.  He contracted tuberculosis and died before reaching thirty.  He was buried by the Knights of Pythias. Though Turpin and Hunter both wrote in a Folk rag style and are the most important early rag composers, there are basic differences in approach.  There is more of an orthodox march-cakewalk feeling in the Hunter rags that is almost completely absent from the eccentric, twisting and turning pianistics of Turpin.  Form for Hunter was a more complex matter.  Whereas Turpin approached the standard Classic rag format (inspired by the Maple Leaf Rage) only once (in St. Louis Rag), Hunter uses a familiar Folk rag emphasis on pentatonic melodies.  These he mixes with an ambitious use of non-chord tones, a feature which reveals a decided influence of white folk music, presumably that which the composer heard in the Tennessee hills where he grew up.  Though black rags generally make use of non-chord tones, they do so in a much more limited fashion and are usually overwhelmingly pentatonic, whereas the flair for non-chord tones pervades all Caucasian rags to a great extent.  In contrast, the Hunter rags are less restless and more bucolic than Turpin's.  Hunter preferred the more deeply flatted keys of A flat and D flat in his writing.  This is a characteristic of much Mississippi Valley Folk rag writing, and many writers in this genre preferred to work in these keys.

@005 Joplin, Scott\Scott Joplin, b.  Texas--possibly in Texarkana, where he was raised--Nov.  24, 1868, d.  Apr.  1, 1917, was the most celebrated composer of instrumental RAGTIME.  Although his family was poor--his parents had been slaves--the young Joplin studied classical piano as a child;  he later worked as a dance musician, and at about the age of 20 he became an itinerant pianist, traveling throughout the Midwest.  He published his first composition, the song "Please Say You Will," in 1895; other sentimental songs and marches followed.  His "Maple Leaf Rag" (1899) became the most popular piano rag of the period, securing for Joplin a modest lifetime income from royalties and the title "King of Ragtime." Altogether, he published some 60 compositions, of which 41 are piano rags;  the balance consists of songs, marches, and the opera Treemonisha (1911), produced unsuccessfully in concert form in 1915 but revived successfully 57 years later.  During his lifetime, Joplin was never acknowledged as a serious composer.  Recognition came posthumously, however, with the republication (1972) of his music, a Pulitzer Prize (1976), and acclaim from both the popular and the scholarly communities. 
Edward A. Berlin
Bibliography: Berlin, E. A., Ragtime (1980); Blesh, R., andJanis, H., They All Played Ragtime, 4th ed.  (1971);  Haskins, J., and Benson, K., Scott Joplin (1978);  Hasse, John E., ed., Ragtime:  Its History, Composers, and Music (1985);  Jasen, David A., and Tichenor, Trebor J., Rags and Ragtime (1989); Joplin, Scott, The Collected Works of Scott Joplin, 2 vols., ed.  by Vera Brodsky Lawrence (1972). 
@006 Lamb, Joseph\Joseph Frances Lamb( Born:  Montclair, New Jersey, December 6, 1887, Died:  Brooklyn, New York, September 3, 1960 ) The youngest son in a family of four children, Lamb grew up in an Irish Catholic neighborhood.  His father James was born in Drogheda, Ireland, married Julia Henneberry of Kilkenny and settled in Montclair in a home which he built.  A successful building contractor, he taught Joe carpentry and mechanics.  Joe attended the Catholic grammar school attached to the Church of the Immaculate Conception.  At about eight years of age he asked his older sisters to teach him the piano lessons they were taking.  Katherine became a church organist and professional piano teacher.  Anastasia was awarded a piano scholarship at St. Elizabeth's Convent.  Aside from these infrequent lessons and studying a beginner's book, he was self-taught.  Upon his father's death in 1900, he was sent to St. Jerome's College in Berlin, Ontario, where he enrolled as a pre-engineering student.  His interest in music flourished, and he composed waltzes, songs and other popular dance music which the Harry M. Sparks Music Publishing Company of Toronto issued.  He got a job as office boy in a wholesale drygoods company in the summer of 1904 and never returned to school.  He spent some time with his brother in San Francisco, returning home shortly before the earthquake, and then worked first for a clothing company and then a publishing house.  He was attracted to Joplin's ragtime, and in 1907 he went to the Stark office in Manhattan where he purchased most of their rags.  There he met Joplin, his ragtime idol, who liked his rags and got Stark to publish them.  After the first published rag, which listed Joplin as "arranger," Stark took everything Lamb sent to him.  Lamb formed the Clover Imperial Orchestra which performed at church and lodge dances.  In 1911 Joe married Henrietta Schultz and moved from Montclair to Brooklyn, where he also briefly entered the Tin Pan Alley world as an arranger for the J. Fred Helf Music Publishing Company.  In April, 1914 he went to work for L. F. Dommerich & Company, Inc., which financed accounts of manufacturers and guaranteed their sales.  Joe retired in December, 1957.  Henrietta died during the flu epidemic in early 1920, leaving Joe with a five-year-old son.  In November, 1922 Joe married Amelia Collins and moved into a large house on East 21st Street in the Sheepshead Bay section of Brooklyn.  Four more children were born to the couple who became solidly entrenched in their neighborhood, so solidly, in fact, that when the local grammar school celebrated its fiftieth anniversary in May, 1976, its name was changed form P.S. 206 to the Joseph F. Lamb School.  Fame for the ragtimer came with the publication of They All Played Ragtime, when it was learned that he was still alive and living in Brooklyn  The ragtime revival of the forties and fifties brought him fan mail and visits from dedicated ragtimers.  It also stimulated him to compose new rags and dust off older ones to complete or revise.  Bob Darch arranged to have Lamb play at the Club 76 in Toronto in October, 1959, his first and only professional engagement.  Earlier that summer, Sam Charters recorded Joe for an album of reminiscences and playing (Folkways FG-3562).  He died of a heart attack at home.

The strength of Joplin's ideas in ragtime is best exemplified by the rags of Joe Lamb.  Rags written before 1907 (which is to say before he became aware of the Joplin rags), recently found in manuscript form, show a rather mediocre attempt at composing rags, using all of the overworked devices of the cakewalk, Popular rag and song.  From the twelve works published between 1908 and 1919, we find that his rags are more predictable, as he synthesized the Joplinesque legato melody style with Scott's expansive keyboard work.  Then, Lamb replace Joplin's phrase structure, making the first half of a section contrasting rather than parallel.  He also avoided the short, motivic phrasing of James Scott, but used Scott's echo effect and rhythmic exuberance.  Among Lamb's greatest original stylistic features are his use of sequences for developmental purposes and his diversity of texture, not only from light to heavy rags, but from section to section and even phrase to phrase, with the total eclipse of the 4-measure phrase in three of his best rags (A sections of American Beauty Rag, Top Liner Rag and Cottontail Rag).  Whereas Joplin preferred 4-measure phrases and Scott 2-measure ones, Lamb developed 8-measure phrases.  These rags published by Stark can be placed in two groups:  easy and hard.  The easy-to-play ones are light-hearted and reflect Scott's expansive keyboard approach.  The hard-to-play one illustrate Lamb's deep understanding of Joplin's ideas.  They have rich and unusual harmonies and varied yet exciting rhythms.  In both types, however, his intuitive feeling for the Missouri folk sounds is not imitative, but imaginatively original.  Lamb was the consummate ragtime composer, the genius who possessed the ability to synthesize the best from all of the Folk, Classic and Popular ragtime music worlds into stirring works of his own great originality.

There are a great number of rags, some of which were published posthumously, some still in manuscript form, which are part of Lamb's oeuvre.  For the sake of simplicity, we shall discuss the rags Stark published first, then group the rest in alphabetical sequence.  Many of these other works were written much earlier but were revised and rewritten during the 1950s.  Some bear no date at all.  We are sure that Alaskan Rag was a new one written to celebrate that territory's entrance into the United States in 1959.

@007 Lodge, Henry\Thomas Henry Lodge( Born:  Providence, Rhode Island, February 9, 1884, Died:  West Palm Beach, Florida, February 16, 1933 ) Lodge was the eldest of four brothers and one sister.  His father had come from Manchester, England and worked in a textile mill.  His mother come from Maryland.  There was no musical background in the family but, with an acquired piano, Lodge took lessons when he was twelve.  After school he obtained a job demonstrating and selling pianos at Meiklejohn's Music Store.  In 1906 he married Sarah Agnes Macke.  Their only child, Mary, was born in 1907.  In 1912 they moved to New York City, where he played piano in cabarets.  He worked as pianist for Irene and Vernon Castle at Castle House, where they gave private dance instructions for very high fees.  Lodge hung around the publishers' offices where he was hailed as a fine composer of Popular rags.  His Temptation Rag of 1909 was an outstanding success, and was played most often in vaudevillle.  He led bands in vaudeville and in dance halls.  He moved to Atlantic City, New Jersey, where his orchestra played on the Million Dollar Pier.  In 1918 his wife died.  In the early twenties he wintered in West Palm Beach, Florida, where his orchestra played for the wealthy.  It was there he met and eventually married his second wife, Irene.  They had three children - Sally, Arthur and Theodore.  He started writing background music for films and, in 1930, lived in Los Angeles while working for Universal and MGM.  At the end of the year his family moved back to the New York area, but continued to winter in West Palm Beach where he unexpectedly died in 1933.
The late rags from 1917 and 1918 are written in a more advanced style, using more complex tonal plans, odd harmonies and surprising textures.  Those called "blues" are rags with some emphasis on minor chords to effect a slightly melancholy aura, and are far from the down-home blues style.  They are a complete departure from his earlier rags which are very danceable, and in the Popular ragtime format.  In all his work Lodge was fascinated with the minor tonality and made more creative use of it than any other composer.  His predilection was for a pattern of three minors:  Dm/Am/Gm.  This became a staple of much later writing in pop music, especially during the Rock era.


@008 Marshall, Arthur \Arthur Marshall ( Born:  Saline County, Missouri, November 20, 1881,Died:  Kansas City, Missouri, August 18, 1968) Attended grade school and Lincoln High School with Scott Hayden in Sedalia.  He was a protégé of Joplin, who lived with the Marshall family when he first arrived in Sedalia.  Marshall also took private classical lessons from Lillian Read and from Mrs. Teeter while in grade school.  Under Joplin's influence, he played his first piano job at the Maple Leaf Club.  Marshall then attended the George R. Smith College, studying music theory, and went to the Teacher's Institute, majoring in Education and obtaining a teaching license.  During this time he began his professional career as a ragtime pianist and played for dances at Liberty Park and for picnics and barbecues at Forest Park.  He also worked in the "parlors" where the official rate was $1.50 for the evening, but with tips take-home pay was closer to $10.00.  He joined McCabe's Minstrels in 1901 as an intermission pianist and marched in their parades playing cymbals.  Marshall found lots of work in St. Louis during the World's Fair.  He married Maude McMannes, joining Joplin's Drama Company, along with Scott Hayden.  He recalled friendly, cutting contests among the pianists - "shootin' at one another - where it caused them to write some pretty good rags."  He left for Chicago in 1906 where opportunities to earn a decent living as a pianist were more plentiful.  Here he married Julia Jackson, who bore him two daughters and a son.  He entered a ragtime contest around 1910 at the Booker T. Washington Theatre in St. Louis, run by Charlie Turpin, and won the top prize of five dollars.  He then went to work for Tom Turpin at the Eureka on Chestnut Street and 22nd Avenue.  His last piano job was playing at Henry Maroche's Moonshine Gardens, when his wife died in childbirth at the end of 1916.  He went to Kansas City in 1917, retired from the music business, and married for a third and last time.

@009 Matthews, Artie\Artie Matthews (Born:  Braidwood, Illinois, November 15, 1888,Died:  Cincinnati, Ohio, October 25, 1958) Matthews moved to Springfield, where his father's job of sinking shafts for coal mines necessitated travel.  Here he took piano lessons from his mother and then from a teacher.  He did not learn to read music, but was taught pieces.  He first played ragtime around 1905 after he heard Banty Morgan, a dope addict.  He played in wine rooms at the back of saloons where women could be found (women were not allowed to stand at bars).  He settled in St. Louis around 1908, but traveled frequently to Chicago.  There he heard and met Tony Jackson and Jelly Roll Morton.  He thought Morton was better than Jackson, and he was, in turn, recalled by Jelly Roll as "the best musician in town" when Jelly visited St. Louis in the teens.  He also considered Clarence Jones and Ed Hardin to be outstanding players.  He arranged for Stark and wrote much of the music with Tom Turpin for the Booker T. Washington Theatre shows.  By now he had not only learned to read music, but was considered the best sight reader of all the pianists in the district.  Early in 1913 one of the Starks heard Matthews and offered him fifty dollars for each rag he turned in.  Five eventually saw publication, but there had been more.  He also arranged and wrote down music for other composer like Thompson (The Lily Rag) and Hampton (Cataract Rag).  He finally moved to Chicago in 1915, where he played at the Berea Presbyterian Church.  At the end of the First World War he was offered the job of organist at the church in Cincinnati.  He moved there permanently and in 1921 founded the Cosmopolitan School of Music, a conservatory where blacks could study classical music.  He taught there until his death.  The five Pastimes reveal his milieu in theatre work; they are bold and dramatic, extraordinarily pianistic, reflecting the vaudeville side of ragtime, but within the polished Classic rag format.  From the perspective of early Classic ragtime, these works are innovations in the idiom.  However, some of the devices used in them were probably not new to the more articulate ragtime performers.
@010 Scott, James \James Sylvester Scott ( Born:  Neosho, Missouri, 1886, Died:  Kansas City, Kansas, August 30, 1938 ) The second child in a family of six, Jimmy was gifted with perfect pitch.  He was given piano lessons by local pianist John Coleman, who was able to give him a thorough grounding in both playing and theory.  His parents, James, Sr. and Molly Thomas Scott, were former slaves who tried to find work to support their large family.  They moved to Carthage in 1901 where James, Jr. completed his schooling at the segregated Lincoln School and took further lessons from Emma Johns, a Carthage Piano teacher.  He started playing at the famed Lakeside Park - both piano and steam calliope - and obtained a job in 1902 with the Dumars Music Store, owned by Charlie Dumars, the director of the Carthage Light Guard Band.  He started out as window-washer and store sweeper, but it wasn't long before he was demonstrating music, plugging songs and playing his own tunes.  Demand for Scott's music induced Dumars to publish his work.  He took a trip to St. Louis in 1906 where he met Joplin, who took his work to Stark.  Fortunately, the first rag Stark bought, Frog Legs Rag, was a hit.  Thus encouraged, Stark kept on publishing whatever Scott sent until 1922 when Stark stopped publishing new works.  Scott left Carthage and the Dumars firm in 1914 when he went to Kansas City, Kansas.  He married Nora Johnson, who predeceased him; they had no children.  One of his cousins was the famed vaudeville blues singer Ada Brown, Who Also lived Kansas City.  He taught piano and organ and played at moving picture theatres.  At first he played at the keyboard for the Panama Theatre; then he formed an eight-piece band for which he acted as arranger.  Scott played at the Lincoln and finally the Eblon.  During the last years of his life, he was in poor health, but kept on composing, although nothing further was published.

The only Missourian of the "Big Three," Scott's rags reflect his activity as a professional pianist and theater organist.  As with most ragtime composers, Scott wrote in one sustained mood.  Joplin was the only one to use moods of varying intensity in one composition.  Whereas Joplin synthesized nineteenth-century European classicism with Mississippi Valley Afro-American folk roots, Scott synthesized the folk tradition with his professional career in popular and jazz music.  This resulted in a developmental feeling in his rags, a spirit more characteristic of twentieth-century music to come, and one step further away from the oldest concept of ragtime, that of a patchwork of various different musical ideas.  He was undoubtedly the best keyboard man of the Classic ragtimers, and loved to punctuate his lyrical melodies with short, abrupt phrases.  Toward the end of his published writing career, his rags became more thickly textured with much varied bass work.  Scott, much more than Joplin, was concerned with exploring the form pianistically more than emotionally.


@011 Turpin, Thomas\Thomas Turpin.  Born:  Savannah, Georgia, 1873 Died:  St. Louis, Missouri, August 13, 1922 Pioneer ragtime pianist and composer whose first saloon was at 9 Targee Street, a notorious area recalled by W. C.. Handy when he passed through St. Louis in 1893 as "so crowded it was a luxury to sit down in one of the many pool halls there."  Before he ran his own saloon, Tom played piano at Babe Connors' world-renowned Castle Club in St. Louis, where several popular songs of the 1890s originated in versions later expurgated for polite society - Hot Time in the Old Town, Ta-Ra-Ra-Boom-Der-A and Bully of the Town.  All were introduced by the famous New Orleans octoroon entertainer, Mama Lou, and a chorus line of girls who wore only skirts and danced on a mirrored floor.  In 1900 Tom opened at 2220 Market Street in the heart of the St. Louis district, then growing up around Union Station, the new train depot.  This area, centering around Market and Chestnut Streets, became known as "Chestnut Valley, " but was referred to by the clergy as "Death Valley."  Most outraged was Father Koffee who tried to get a law passed in 1893 removing the pianos from the wine rooms.  Turpin's Saloon became the Rosebud Bar, the mecca for all underground ragtime musicians.  Tom is referred to in the black newspaper of the time, The St. Louis Palladium, as "President of the Rosebud Club," a group of ragtime pianists.  He and his brother Charlie controlled the Booker T. Washington Theatre where music was composed and arranged at various times by Tome, Joe Jordan and Artie Matthews.  The brothers were the first black politicians in town and ran gambling houses, dance halls and sporting houses.  Tom was so heavy that his piano was raised on blocks so that he could play it standing up, his stomach getting in the way when seated.

The Turpin rags are vibrant, energetic rags, stamped with a distinct personality and have the spontaneity of a creative performance.  They are mostly linear and always in one of the following keys:  C, F or G.  They have what was called a "jumpy," urban flavor mixed with a Mississippi Valley folk-roots flavor, and are intensely pianistic overall.  They are creative transformations of folk backgrounds into early idiomatic rag scores for piano - not very bucolic, as with many small-town Folk rags, but rather with a restlessness and gaiety of Old St. Louis, itself evolving from a countrified atmosphere to a metropolitan center.

@012 Woods, H. Clarence \Clarence H. Woods. ( Born:  Blue Earth, Ohio, June 19, 1888, Died:  Davenport, Iowa, September 30, 1956 ) Woods grew up in Carthage, Missouri, where he and James Scott took piano lesson from the same teacher, Emma Johns.  He spent many early years as a pianist with a traveling drama troupe, a silent film pianist, an accompanist and soloist in vaudeville throughout Texas and Oklahoma; he became a theatre manager, an organist in movie houses, an orchestra leader, a radio entertainer and, finally, ended his career as a professional musician as chief organist, composer and arranger for the Ringling Brothers-Barnum & Bailey Circus.

@013 A History of Ragtime (Part 1)\Ragtime. The word itself conjures up images of a place and time at once simpler and yet somehow more sensual than our current way of life.
That a succesful book (and later a movie) having little to do with music could be titled "Ragtime" is an indication of its allure.

The phenomenon known as Ragtime has left us heirs to a body of musical compositions which we can enjoy on their own terms, as delightful, miniature structures, full of good tunes and fun rhythms. But how these came into being, and the influence of Ragtime, both musically and socially, is a facinating story which can make listening to these wonderful, gem-like compositions more meaningful and enjoyable.

As well as providing a solid collection of musical works enjoyed worldwide to this day, Ragtime was the first truly North American musical genre which combined African and European elements to produce a unique and instantly recognizeable style of music.  Ragtime lead, on the one hand to Jazz, and on the other to novelty piano music, such as "Kitten on the Keys".  Ragtime introduced Afro-American rhythms into the mainstream of North American musical life, at a time when people of colour were denied basic human rights, and provided a way into the commercial music industry for many Black performers and composers.  Ragtime even had a direct effect on the manufacture and sale of pianos in North America!
But how did all this get started?
Although much uncertainty about the origin of the word "Ragtime" still exists, we know that in 1886, in an article in Century Magazine (February 1886) entitled "The Dance in Place Congo", the rhythm of a black dance in New Orleans was described as "ragged". From here it is but a short step to "ragged time" and then to "ragtime". This is probably as close to truth as we shall get. However, before pieces called "rags" were written down and published, we may be certain that music of this nature was being performed widely, either as newly composed (though un-notated) compositions, or by "ragging" existing popular songs.
An account of the practice (and effect) of "ragging" an existing song can be found in the Saint Louis Post-Dispatch from the year of 1888, and this account has caused many to name Saint Louis as the birthplace of ragtime.  Here, in part, is what was written:

	There were hundreds of such verses.... But the new thing was the strangely alluring and exciting rhythm to which they were sung, a veritable call of the wild, which mightily stirred the pulses of city-bred people.

	Syncopated time, as old as music, was the means of this effect.  But it was syncopated time so exaggerated and emphasized as to reveal for the first time its capacity of powerful appeal to the flesh. ...

	"That song sounds so ragged" was the comment of one who had heard the conventional rhythms being torn to tatters. And the name "ragtime" was born.
     	  
We'll return to this "syncopated time" (or "syncopation") in a bit, but first let us look at The Ragtime Era, which, from our examples above, we may now date as beginning 1886 or 88, and which was to last until about 1920, when both Jazz and piano novelty pieces became more popular. The early 1970's saw a "Ragtime Revival" which resurrected this body of music and gave it new life via new recordings on established lables and concerts in halls normally reserved for "classical" music. Young composers such as Bill Bolcom in Michigan began to compose their own rags as they recognized the value inherent in the style. This computer program which you are now using is a technological extension of the 1970's Ragtime Revival, which itself was fueled by the movie "The Sting", and in particular by the movie's soundtrack featuring Scott Joplin's "The Entertainer: A Rag Time Two Step", first published in Saint Louis in 1902.

Technological advancement occured in the Ragtime Era as well.  This was the time when the phonograph recording and the gramophone cylinder brought music to the masses. But, for Ragtime, the more important technological development was the invention of the Player Piano.  Although attempts in the direction of a piano that would play itself began as early as 1868, it was not until 1901, when Melville Clark introduced his "Apollo" player piano, that the full 88 note keyboard range became available.  The rest of the industry quickly adopted this standard, and by 1904 there were more than 40 different types of automatic pianos on the North American market. There were even coin-operated player pianos used in commercial establishments.

For those who have never seen or "played" a player piano, it looks like a large upright piano, with sliding doors above the keyboard and two large pedals over the regular piano pedals.  Inside the sliding doors is a mechanism which accepts the paper piano roll, into which thousands of small, square perforations have been cut. Pressing alternately the left and right pedals causes the paper roll to rotate, and pumps air through a metal bar across which the paper glides.  When a perforation in the roll allows air to pass through, the corresponding key is activated and the piano "plays". The more advanced pianos would reproduce dynamic shading [the relative softness or loudness of the music], and eventually a technique was devised whereby an artist could sit at a special piano and perform a rag while a piano roll was cut in real time.  These rolls were called "hand played" and were in great demand by the public, although frequently the artist's actual performance was later "touched up" by an expert, who cut additional perforations into the roll!
Although rags comprised only a small portion of the huge output of piano rolls during this time, at least one thousand rags did appear on piano rolls, many issued on several different labels.  This is important to the popularity of Ragtime, as very few rags were available on phonograph or cylinder recordings.  Player pianos were quite expensive for their time, and such an investment elevated the purchaser to a new social class, much as buying an expensive stereo system does today. You could have your friends over and demonstrate this new marvel, which presented lifelike performances of great pianists playing in your own parlour.  And in many instances the music being played was Ragtime.  Some aspiring pianists even learned how to play by watching the piano keys move up and down and trying to fit their own fingers over the correct keys. The piano roll business peaked in about 1920, coincident with the end of the Ragtime Era.

The Ragtime Era was indeed a time of change. People were moving from country to city, and immigration from abroad added to the growing urban population. In 1890 only 22% of the U.S. population lived in a town or city; by 1920 this number had risen to 54%. Transportation was changing, as the railway system was completed and the motorcar and electric railways became more common. The Wright brothers made the first airplane flight and Ford introduced the Model T.
 
Ragtime music itself eventually spread North and East, into Canada, and across the Atlantic to Europe. Canada's place in the history of Ragtime is small but interesting.  The great Rag composer, Joseph Lamb (1887-1960) lived in Kitchener, Ontario (then Berlin) from 1901 to 1903, attending a Catholic prep school.  He wrote his first rags there and his first publications were in Canada, as well.  Scott Joplin's The Maple Leaf Rag is perhaps the best known of all rags, and some fans of Ragtime know that it was named after the Maple Leaf Club, in Sedalia, Missouri, where Joplin played the piano and where he was discovered.  But few know that the proprietors of the Maple Leaf Club, Will and Walker Williams, were originally from London, Ontario and had named their club in memory of their native Canada.
 
Ragtime quickly reached that mecca of sophistication, New York City, where it was transformed into the style of jazz piano playing known as Stride.  One of the greatest ragtime pianists was James P. Johnson (1891-1955), who, from 1916 to 1930, was the dominant New York pianist and composer of rags. He was also the first Black pianist to cut his own piano roll rags. In 1953 he was interviewed, and his reminiscences provide perhaps the best view we will have into the world of Ragtime. The following are excerpts from the ful interview, published originally in 1959 in The Jazz Review.

	I became friendly with one tickler [from "tickle the ivories"], Claude Grew, who could play anything in all keys.  That was the mark of a cabaret player who had to accompany different singers in their favourite keys.  He taught me everything he knew.  What they played wasn't ragtime as we know it.  It was mostly popular songs with a strong rhythm and with syncopated vamps, not a whole composition or arrangement.  Scott Joplin's pieces were popular.  They got around the country, but the ticklers I knew just played sections of them that they heard someplace.  I never knew that they were Joplin's until later. 

At that time (ca. 1908), Jersey City, New Jersey, just across the Hudson river from Manhattan, was a "temporary settlement" for ragtime pianists, at times having more good players there than in any other place in the United States.  James P. explains this phenomenon:

	Well, most of the ragtime players were working in sporting houses and cabarets in the South - Baltimore, Norfolk, Charleston, Atlanta - and in the Middle West - Pittsburgh, St. Louis, Memphis and other places. (con't)

@014 A History of Ragtime (Part 2)\Ragtime. (part 2) . Now, most of these fellows were big-time pimps, or at least did a little hustling on their own.  The ladies liked their music, so these boys would play slow drags, rags, or songs that would touch the ladies' hearts - so they would get a woman or two or three to go out and hustle for them.  These ticklers didn't make much money, playing sometimes 12 hours a day in the houses or cafes -maybe $10 a week and as much more in tips.  Some had to work on tips alone.  So they managed a few girls on the side.

	Now, a good girl was measured by how much money she could draw, and the best kind of sporting woman was a thieving woman who knew how to get into a man's pocket and get his bankroll.  Sometimes a girl would roll a live one and get $500 or $1,000.  This usually brought a complaint to the police, so the girl and her tickler friend would have to leave town.  They'd head north and east to New York and the last stop on the railroad was Jersey City.  It still is for a lot of railroads.

James P. moved from Jersey City to New York in 1908, and the next memory provides a startling contrast to what we have just heard.

	I used to go to the old New York Symphony concerts; a friend of my brother's who was a waiter used to get tickets from its conductor, who came to the restaurant where he worked. I didn't get much out of them, but the full symphonic sounds made a great impression on me.  That was when I first heard Mozart, Wagner, Von Weber, Meyerbeer, Beethoven and Puccini.
Johnson himself in later years composed his own "serious" compositions, and as a young man would also go to Hofmann or Rachmaninoff recitals at Carnegie Hall. He speaks of how this cultural atmosphere influenced Ragtime.

	The other sections of the country never developed the piano as far as the New York boys did.  The reason the New York boys became such high-class musicians was because the New York piano was developed by the European method, system and style.  The people in New York were used to hearing good piano played in concerts and cafes.  The ragtime players had to live up to that standard.  They had to get orchestral effects, sound harmonies, chords and all the techniques of European concert pianist who were playing their music all over the city.  New York developed the orchestral piano. The other boys from the South and West at that time played in smaller dimensions.  We wouldn't dare do that because the public was used to better playing.  When you heard the biggest ragtime specialists play, you would hear fine harmony, exciting touch and tone, and all the themes developed.

James P. Johnson got into the ragtime life at a young age, and he remembered many picturesque details:

	In 1911, when I was still going to school in short pants, I used to go to a cellar called the 100th Street Hall, run by a fellow nicknamed "Souser".  I never knew his name; he was a juice hound. They had a four or five piece band there (which) played verses and choruses in simple arrangements until 2 A.M. every night.   But after two, they pulled the piano out into the middle of the floor and "Souser" would play terrific rags.  Then he'd let me play and I'd hit the piano until 4 A.M.  I kept my schoolbooks in the coal bin there and went on to school after a little sleep.

	In the same year, I was taken uptown to Barron Wilkins' place in Harlem.  Another boy and I let our short pants down to look grown up and sneaked in.  Who was playing there but Jelly Roll Morton!  He had just arrived from the West and he was red hot.  The place was on fire! We heard him play his Jelly Roll Blues.  I remember that he was dressed in full-back clothes and wore a light brown melton overcoat, with a three-hole hat to match.  He had two girls with him.  I was able to appreciate him then, but I couldn't steal his stuff.  I wasn't good enough yet.

	That same year, 1911, I heard Thad "Snowball" Wilkerson who played only by ear and only in one key - B natural.  He had taught Alberta Simmons to play rags.  Alberta Simmons was kind enough to teach me the full Joplin Rags that she played so well: Frogs Legs...Maple Leaf Rag...and the Sunflower Slow Drag.James P. took a number of jobs in New York, including playing for movies and accompanying vaudeville acts, but his memories of playing for a "dancing class" give an interesting insight to ragtime music:

	One night a week, I played piano for Drake's Dancing Class on 62nd Street, which we called "The Jungles Casino". It was officially a dancing school, since it was very hard for Negroes to get a dance-hall license.  But you could get a license to open a dancing school very cheap.  The Jungles Casino was just a cellar too, without fixings.  The furnace, coal, and ashes were still there behind a partition.  The coal bin was handy for guests to stash their liquor in case the cops dropped in.

	There were dancing classes all right, but there were no teachers.  The "pupils" danced sets, two-steps, waltzes.  I played for these regulation dances, but instead of playing straight, I'd break into a rag in certain places. The older ones didn't care too much for this, but the younger ones would scream when I got good to them with a bit of rag in the dance music now and then.

James P. Johnson got to know many of the important ragtime pianists, including the legendary Luckey Roberts, composer of, among others, Palm Beach Rag and The Junk Man Rag. He describes Luckey's technique:

	Luckey had massive hands that could stretch a fourteenth on the keyboard [i.e. from C up to the B just short of two octaves above - a distance of twelve inches from the tip of his thumb to the tip of his little finger!] and he played tenths as easy as others played octaves.  His tremolo was terrific, and he could drum on one note with two or three fingers in either hand.  His style in making breaks was like a drummer: he'd flail his hands in and out, lifting them high.  A very spectacular pianist.

This showmanship was not lost on James P., as he describes his own increasing ability:

	I was starting to develop a good technique.  I was born with absolute pitch and could catch a key that a player was using and copy it, even Luckey's.  I played rags very accurately and brilliantly - running chromatic octaves
	and glissandos [sliding the thumb or a finger across many keys] up and down with both hands.  It made a terrific effect.

	I did double glissandos straight and backhand, glissandos in sixths and double tremolos.  These would run other ticklers out of the place at cutting sessions.  They wouldn't play after me.  I would put these tricks in on the breaks, and I could think of a trick a minute.  I was playing a lot of piano then, travelling around and listening to every good player I could.  I'd steal their breaks and style and practise them until I had them perfect. 

Johnson's comment about "cutting sessions" refers to the informal tradition which mandated that if two or more ragtime pianists were near the same piano, a competition would ensue - not only would the listeners know who had won and who had lost, the losers would know and remember it for the rest of their lives.  This tradition carried on from Ragtime to Jazz, and eventually involved all instruments, although it remained strongest amongst pianists.  James P. gives us some idea of how he achieved his winning ability:

	From listening to classical piano records and concerts...I would learn concert effects and build them into blues and rags.  Sometimes I would play basses a little lighter than the melody and change harmonies.  When playing a heavy stomp, I'd soften it right down - then I'd make an abrupt change like I heard Beethoven do in a sonata.

	Some people thought it was cheap, but it was effective and dramatic.  With a solid bass like a metronome,  I'd use chords with half and quarter changes.  Once I used Liszt's Rigoletto Concert Paraphrase as an introduction to a stomp.  Another time, I'd use pianissimo [soft] effects in the groove and let the dancers' feet be heard scraping on the floor.

	In practicing technique, I would play in the dark to get completely familiar with the keyboard.  To develop clear touch and the feel of the piano, I'd put a bed sheet over the keyboard and play difficult pieces through it.

	I had gotten power and was building a serious orchestral piano.  I did rag variations on the William Tell overture, Grieg's Peer Gynt Suite and even a  Russian Rag based on Rachmaninoff's Prelude in C-Sharp Minor.  In my Imitator's Rag the last strain had Dixie in the right hand and The Star Spangled Banner in the left.

	I went around copping [winning] piano prize contests and I was considered one of the best in New York - if not the best.  I was slim and dapper, and they called me "Jimmie"  then.

His Imitator's Rag was, unfortunately, never recorded or published.
Likewise his Daintiness Rag.(con't)
@015 A History of Ragtime (Part 3) \Ragtime.( Part 3 ).  Johnson's Steeplechase Rag was recorded on a piano roll in 1917, but was never published or copyrighted.  Many giants of ragtime, including Scott Joplin, exhibited a certain altruism (or naivety) which could not have helped their bank accounts.  However, his comment that he was "slim and dapper" deserves further elaboration.  Ragtime ticklers (or "perfessors" as they were sometimes called in the sporting houses) were acutely conscious of their public image.  We saw earlier how James P. Johnson could remember exact details of the way in which Jelly Roll Morton was dressed, 42 years after their first meeting. Here he describes two other piano legends and their sense of style.

	Abba Labba [a stage name for a friend and pupil of Luckey Roberts] was the working girls' Jelly Roll.  His speciality was to play a lot of piano for the girls who were laundresses and cooks.  They would supply him with stylish clothes from their customer's laundry and make him elaborate rosettes for his sleeve guards.  The cooks furnished him with wonderful meals.  Most of the full-time hustlers used to cultivate a working girl like that, so they could have good meals and fancy laundry.  Abba Labba had a beautiful left hand and did wonderful bass work.  He played with half tone and quarter tone [sic] changes that were new ideas then.

	Willie ["The Lion"] Smith was one of the sharpest ticklers I ever met - and I met most of them.  He was a fine dresser, very careful about the cut of his clothes and a fine dancer too, in addition to his great playing.  All of us used to be proud of our dancing -  Louis Armstrong, for example, was considered the finest dancer among the musicians.  It made for attitude and stance when you walked into a place, and made you strong with the gals.  When Willie Smith walked into a place, his every move was a picture.  Yes, every move we made was studied, practised, and developed, just like it was a complicated piano piece.
We are fortunate that James P. Johnson's recollections of the Ragtime Era have survived to give us a true picture of what life was like amongst the professional ticklers.  Yet the majority of ragtime players were not professionals or even men; they were women who purchased ragtime sheet music as quickly as it could be printed, and then learned and played it in their homes. Because the ability to play the piano was considered, in this era, an essential social grace to be cultivated by young women seeking marriage, and because Ragtime was looked down upon by most piano teachers and many parents, buying the music and practising it secretly must have caused much inner strife and guilt.  But the appeal of Ragtime overcame the guilt, as several hundred publishers got into the business of Ragtime. 

However, not all of North American society welcomed Ragtime with open arms, and considerable controversy surrounded this music as it became more widely available. This is especialy striking today, as Ragtime sounds to us subdued and sophisticated in comparison with our own rock music.  Although "classical" European composers such as Claude Debussy and Igor Stravinsky were quick to recognize its quality and importance, and to import the style of Ragtime into their own compositions, others in North America were not so open minded.

People were concerned that an appreciation of Ragtime music would interfere with the development of a taste for "classical" music, and for these people -  music teachers, critics, etc.- Ragtime presented a threat to their chosen way of making a living.  If Ragtime became too popular, the public might no longer value the skills of the "real" musicians.  Further, the Puritanical influence, ever prominent in American life, caused another group of people - clergy, politicians, school administrators - to argue that Ragtime was the music of the Devil, and that listening to, or worse yet, dancing ecstatically to it would result in a descent into Hell, or at least the first steps leading there. In Craftsman magazine, of December 1915, Karl Muck (who had conducted the Boston Symphony) stated: "I think what you call ... ragtime is poison. It poisons the very source of your musical growth, for it poisons the taste of the young".  This is clearly an example of the threatening aspect of Ragtime to the "classical" musician.
The second objection, that Ragtime was inherently immoral, was wrapped in the pervasive racism of turn-of-the-century America.
Ragtime was not "uplifting" music of the sort found, for example, in a Church, and therefore Ragtime should be banned. In an August 25th, 1913 article ("Canon Assails Our New Dances") and in an editorial the following day, the New York Times reported that Canon Newbolt of Saint Paul's Cathedral in London, England had asked in a sermon: "Would indecent dances, suggestive of evil and destructive of modesty, disgrace our civilization for a moment if professed Christians were to say: I will not allow my daughter to turn into a Salome?".  The editorial the following day backed the good Canon's outrage, calling Ragtime music "rude" and "vulgar" and noting "alarm" at the "loose conduct" accompanying it.  With the ascendency of Jazz in the 1920's these same arguments, from the same segments of the population, were simply transferred to the newer music; after all, Jazz was also a product of Afro-American culture, so the same racist arguments and denigrations could be used just as effectively.

As ragtime compositions became more and more notated and published, there emerged certain traits typical of the style.  The first was (as James P. has referred to it) a "metronomic bass" - a steady, steady, pulsating left hand which did not deviate from the beat.  This consisted of a low note or octave alternated with a somewhat higher chord, in a downbeat/upbeat manner.  This could be called an "oom-pah oom-pah" rhythm.

Against this steady bass is placed a melody whose accents cross the bass rhythm; that is, strong accents in the melody do not coincide with the bass notes but rather fall in between the bass pulse. This is termed "syncopation" and, as we have seen, was the chief and immediate attraction of Ragtime.  In 1903, a Dr. Gustav Kuhl, from Germany, attended a masked ball in Georgia and heard Ragtime music for the first time.  He desrcribed his reaction in an article titled "The Musical Possibilies of Ragtime" in the March and April 1903 Metronome  magazine:

	But my senses were captivated against my will by the music, which seemed to be produced by a little army of devils to my left.  It seemed incredible to me for quite a while how any person could dance a single step to such an irregular and noisy conglomeration of sounds. The continuous reappearance and succession of accentuations on the wrong parts of the bar and unnatural syncopations imparts somewhat of a rhythmic compulsion to the body which is nothing short of irresistible and which makes itself felt even before the ears have discerned the time or rhythmic value of the various parts of the bar.

In addition to this syncopation over a steady bass, Ragtime compositions can frequently be heard as a series of four strains or themes, ABCD, or ABACD, and each of these strains would be repeated after it was first heard before moving to the next.  This formal structure is remarkably consistent in the rags of Scott Joplin.

Each strain had its own characteristics.  The first strain, or A, would be a straight-ahead melody, complete in itself and to which it would be possible to return after the B strain.  This was the melody most associated with the rag's title. The B theme would be lighter, not as substantial as the A, and often beginning with a few unaccompanied notes in the right hand. The C strain contrasts with both the A and the B ideas.  It is usually lower and somewhat "darker", with a sort of subdued rhythmic excitement. The D strain finishes things up in a triumphant, totally positive burst of energy.

The publication of these formal, composed Rags became an important part of the music industry. John Stillwell Stark of the Stark Music Co., published Scott Joplin's and other composers' rags, first from his office in Sedalia, Missouri, then in Saint Louis, and finally in New York.  All told, he published about 115 rags from 1892 to 1910. However, the Jerome H. Remick & Co., working out of Detroit and New York published about 300 rags, beginning in 1905.  These were the two giants of Ragtime sheet music, and Stark in particular was important not just for publishing the music but also for promoting it with zeal.  He made it a point to publish rags of high artistic quality which he called "classic rags".  This disemination and promotion gave Ragtime a semblance of respectibilty, and allowed it to enter middle-class homes from which it might otherwise have been banned, due to its prior association with sporting houses.  In addition to the two mentioned above, about 12 other major firms were active in publishing rags.


Ragtime, as a style, did have a somewhat shady birth, as we have indeed seen, but Ragtime as a compositional genre, as developed, perfected, notated and published by such composers as Scott Joplin, Joseph Lamb, and James Scott, was a music of poise and civility.  These rags are formally structured, melodically inventive, and always rhythmically captivating.  That they are still played and enjoyed seventy years after the so-called "Death of Ragtime" is a testament to their endurance and to their intrinsic value. !!!
 
	








@
